
--- Page 1 ---
See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/333815781
Second language speech learning: Theory, ﬁndings and problems
Chapt er · Januar y 1995
CITATIONS
2,152READS
45,596
1 author:
James Emil Fle ge
Univ ersity of Alab ama at Birmingham
267 PUBLICA TIONS    25,436  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y James Emil Fle ge on 17 June 2019.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.

--- Page 2 ---
I In Winifred Strange (editOf), Speech Perception and Linguislic Experience : 
Issues in Cross-Language Research. Timonium , MD: York Press, 1995. 
Chapter • 8 
Second Language Speech Learning 
Theory, Findings, and 
Problems 
James Emil Flege 
The aim of OUT research is to understand how 
speech learning changes over the life span and to explain why "earlier 
is better" as far as learning to pronounce a second language (L2) is con­
cerned. An assumption we make is that the phonetic systems used in 
the production and perception of vowels and consonants remain adap· 
live over the hfe span, and that phonetic systems reorganize in response 
to sounds encountered in an L2 through the addition of new phonetic 
categories, or through the modification of old ones. The chapter is 
organized in the following way. Several general hypotheses concern­
ing the cause of foreign accent in L2 speech production are summa­
rized in the introductory section. In the next section, a model of L2 
speech learning that aims to account for age-related changes in 12 pro­
nunciation is presented. The next three sections present summaries of 
empirical research dealing with the production and perception of L2 
vowels, word-initial consonants, and word-final consonants. The final 
section discusses questions of general theoretical interest, with special 
attention to a featural (as opposed to a segmental) level of analysis. 
Although nonsegmental (i.e., prosodic) dimensions are an important 
source of foreign accent, the present chapter focuses on phoneme-sized 
units of speech. Although many different languages are learned as an 
L2, the focus is on the acquisition of English. 
INTRODUCTION 
Foreign accents in English are common in the speech of non-native 
speakers. Listeners hear foreign accents when they detect divergences 
from English phonetic norms along a wide range of segmental and 
suprasegmental (i.e., prosodic) dimensions . Foreign accents may have 
a number of undesirable consequences for non-native speakers. They 
233 

--- Page 3 ---
234 I FJe8e 
may make non-natives difficult to understand, especially in non-ideal 
listening conditions (e.g., Lane 1963). They may cause listeners to mis­
judge a non-native speaker's affective state (e.g., Gumperz 1982; Fayer 
and Krasinksi 1987; Holden and Hogan 1993), or provoke negative 
personal eyaluations, either as the result or the extra eUort a listener 
must expend in order to understand, or by evoking negative group 
stereotypes (Lambert et a!. 1960; Giles 1970). 
Researchers have proposed many different explanations for foreign 
accents., For example, neurological maturation might reduce neural 
plasticity (Penfield 1965; Lenneberg 19(7), leading to a diminished 
ability to add or modify sensorimotor programs for producing sounds 
in an L2 (Sapon 1952; McLaughlin 1977). Others have suggested that 
foreign accents are caused, at least in part, by the inaccurate perception 
of sounds in an L2 (Flege 1992a,b; Rochet this volume). Still others have 
proposed that the primary cause of foreign accents is inadequate pho­
netic input, insufficienbmotivation, psychological reasons for wanting 
to retain a foreign accent, or the establishment of incorrect habits in 
early stages of L21earning (see Flege 1988b, for review). The diversity 
of these hypotheses attests to the complexity of the phenomenon of 
foreign accent. 
Neurological maturation has often been cited as the primary 
impetus for a critical period for speech learning. Many believe that 
new forms of speech cannot be learned perfectly once a crHical period. 
has been passed (e.g., Lenneberg 1967; Scovel 1988; Patkowski 1990). 
Although this may be true, such a conclusion fails to provide insight 
into how l2 learning differs hom L1 acquisition, or what actually causes 
foreign accent (FJege 1987b; Long 1990). Nor does a critical period 
hypothesis seem consistent with the foreign accent ratings obtained 
by Flege, Munro, and MacKay (1995a). This study assessed degree of 
perceived foreign accent in the English spoken by native Italian (NO 
sub;ects who differed according to their age of learning (AOL) English. 
The 240 Nt subjects examined had begun learning English between 
the ages of 3 and 21 years in Canada, where they had lived for over 30 
years on average. Native English-speaking listeners used a continuous 
scale to rate English sentences for degree of accent in English. Figure 1 
shows a strong linear component (r = 0.71) in the relation between the 
NI subjects' AOL and their degree of perceived foreign accent. The later 
in life the NI subjects began learning English, the more strongly 
foreign-accented their English sentences were judged to be. If a critical 
period exists, it apparently does nut resilit in a sharp discontinuity in 
L2 pronunciation ability at around puberty. 
In 1981, Flege noted the following paradox, which eventually led 
to the formulation of the model presented below. At an age when chil­
dren's sensorimotor abilities are generally improving, they seem to 

--- Page 4 ---
Second-Language Speech Learning 1235 
250~---'-----r----,----,----~ -c 
Q) 
9 .... 200 
al 
.~ 
Q) 
~ 
~ -o 
Q) 
~ 
0> 
Q) o 
Q) 
0> 
~ 
Q) 
~ 150 
100 
50 
0 
0 • 
• 
• • .... 
': • I 
• 
5 10 15 20 25 
Age of Arrival in Canada (years) 
Figure 1. The mean foreign accent ratings accorded English sentences spoken 
by 240 native Italian speakers of Italian who differed according to age of 
learning (AOL) English, in years. Each mean is based on 150 judgments (5 
sentences x 10 native English-speaking listeners) (data are from Flege, Munro, 
and MacKay 1995a). 
lose the ability to learn the vowels and consonants of an L2. Segmental 
produchon research in the 19705 focused on the classroom learning of 
foreign languages, or on early stages of naturalistic L2 learning. 
Interference from the L 1 was seen as the primary phonological cause 
of foreign accent. A common view was that 1) an L2 sound that is 
"identified" with a sound in the L1 will be replaced by the L1 sound, 
even if the L 1 and L2 sounds differ phonetically; 2) contrasts between 
sounds in the L2 that do not exist in the Ll will not be honored; and 
3) contrasts in the L1 that are not found in the L2 may nevertheless be 
produced in the L2 (e.g., Weinreich 1953; Lehiste 1988). Little attention 
was paid to the effect of AOL or variations in amount of L2 experi­
ence. Thus, it was common to encounter descriptions of L2 production 
errors that contained no reference to when in life L2 learning com­
menced, or how 10118 the L2 had been spoken, aT with whom (e.g., 
Koutsoudas and Koutsoudas 1983). 
Second-language speech learning has been characterized as more 
"analytic" than L1 acquisition <e.g., Mack 1988), especially for those 

--- Page 5 ---
2361 Flege 
whose early exposure to the target L2 comes primarily through the 
written word. Interference was usually described as occurring at a 
segmental level (but d. Weinreich 1957, who emphasized featural-Iev­
el analysis). This assumed that bilinguals decompose unfamiliar 
words of the L2 into phonemes and allophones. Given this conceptu· 
alization, accurate production of an l2 sound would require: (1) an 
accurate appraisal of ' the properties that differentiate the L2 sounds 
from one another, and from sounds in the L1; (2) the storing and 
structuring of this information in long-term memory; and (3) the 
learning of gestures with which to reliably reproduce the represented L2 
sounds. 
The view that foreign accent is caused by motoric difficulty (3, 
above) is inconsistent with the following observations. Although very 
common, foreign accents are apparently not inevitable (Hill 1970; 
Novoa, Fein, and Obler 198B). For example, Neufeld (1979) required 
his adult subjects to listen for a long time before talking. They were 
then apparently able to pronounce sentences in an unfamiliar foreign 
language without foreign accent. Adults may be as able as children to 
imitate foreign sounds. Finally, Snow and Hoefnagel·H6hle (1979) 
examined the naturalistic acquisition of Dutch by native English (NE) 
speakers differing in chronological age. Adults were at first better able 
than children to imitate and spontaneously produce Dutch sounds. By 
the end of the one-year study period, the spontaneous production of 
Dutch sounds by the NE adults and children was roughly equivalent. 
Why do adults fail to exploit their motoric abilities fully? One 
possibility is that they fail to perceive L2 sounds accurately (1 and 2, 
above). Diffetences in segmental perception between native and non­
native speal<;ers have been. shown to exist in many studies (e.g., Miya· 
waki .t al. 1975; Flege and Eefting 19t16; Flege and Hillenbrand 1986, 
1987). In gating experiments, non·natives must hear a larger portion of 
a word than native speaker~ to recognize the word (Nooteboom and 
Truin 1980; Koster 1987). Perceptual differences are indirectly evident 
in the difficulty non·nativcs may have in comprehending English, 
especially distorted or synthetiC spee(:h versions of English or anom· 
aious sentences (Oyama 1978; Nabelck and Donahue 1984; Greene 
Pisani, and Gradman 1985; Mack 1988; Ozawa and Logan 1989; Mack 
et al. 1990; McAllister 1990). 
The hypothesis that articuiatory errors have a perceptual basis 
has been examined extensively in LI acquisition research. Powers 
(1957) reviewed evidence that children's misarticulalion of sounds 
cannot usually be traced to deficits in auditory acuity. A large number 
of studies that attempted to establish a link between the ability to dis· 
criminute a broad range of speech sounds, on the one hand, and 
speech sound production errors, on the other, yielded contradictory 

--- Page 6 ---
Second·Lan8uage Speech Learning 1237 
results, at least for normany developing children (Weiner 1967). Other 
studies tested the hypothesis that the inaccurate production of an L1 
sound could be attributed to an inadequate perceptual specification of 
it (Spriestersbach and Curtis 1951), or to difficulty discriminating a 
sound produced in error from its replacement. For example, Monnin 
and Huntington (1974) found that children who misarticulated /J/ 
(usually as /w/l were less able to correctly identify /JI and Iwl in a 
picture pointing task than were children who produced / J/ correctly. 
Other studies, however , failed to reveal a direct link between the per­
ception and misarticulation of particular sounds (e.g., Haggard, Corri­
gall, and legg 1971; Waldman, Singh, and Hayden 1978). locke (1980) 
designed special tests for children .. ged 3-7 years, based on the specif­
ic consonants each child misarticulated. The children failed to percep­
tually distinguish a sound they misarticulated from its replacement 
sound in less than one·third of instances. Furthermore, many of the 
observed perceptual errors involved /fl versus 10/, and so might 
have had an auditory basis (see Sussman 1993). This led Locke (1980, 
p. 465) to conclude that the root cause of many L1 segmental produc­
tion errors is to be found at a "motor" level rather than at a Hmentalis­
tic (level) of linguistic organization ." 
The conclusion drawn for L1 acquisition may not apply equally to 
L2 learning, which differs from Ll acquisition in certain respects. 
Most importantly , bilinguals tend to interpret sounds encountered in 
an l2 through the "grid" of their 11 phonology (Trubetzkoy 1939; 
Wode 1978). This virtually ensures that non-native speakers will per­
ceive at least some L2 vowels and consonants differently than do 
native speakers. For example, French Iyl is mispronounced as IiI by 
Portuguese learners. but as luI by native English learners. Data re­
ported by Rochet (this volume) suggests that native Portuguese learn­
ers of French may hear Iyl tokens as /i/, whereas English learners of 
French hear /yl tokens as luI. Japanese and Russian both have lsI 
and ttl, but lack 18/. Japanese leMners mispronounce English 10/ as 
lsI, Russians as /t/ (Weinberger 1990). This is not to say, however, 
that non-natives' perception of L2 sounds remains constant. The 
results of feedback training experiments have suggested that lan­
guage-specific perceptual patterns are modifiable to some extent (e.g., 
Logan, Lively, and Pisani 1991; Strange 1992). This suggests that the 
perceived relation of L1 and L2 sounds may change during naturalis­
tic 1..2 learning . 
SPEECH LEARNING MODEL 
F1ege and his colleagues have developed a speech learning model (SlM) 
that aims to account for age-related limits on the ability to produce 1..2 
vowels and consonants in a native-like fashion. The SLM is concerned 

--- Page 7 ---
2381 Fleye 
primarily with the ultimate attainment of L2 pronunciation , so work 
carried out within its framework focuses on bilinguals who have spoken 
their L2 for many years, not beginners . During Ll acquisition, speech 
perception becomes attuned to the contrastive phonic elements of the 
L1. Learners of an L2 may fail to discern the phonetic differences 
between pairs of sounds in the L2, or between L2 and L 1 sounds, either 
because phonetically distinct sounds in the L2 are "assimilated " to a sin­
gle category (see Best this volume), because the L 1 phonology filters out 
features (or properties) of U sounds that are important phonetically but 
not phonologically , or both. The model claims that without accurate per­
ceptual "targets" to guide the sensorimotor learning of L2 sounds, pro­
duction of the 12 sounds will be inaccurate. The model does ,wI claim, 
however, that all L2' production errors are perceptually motivated. For 
example , motoric output constraint s b .. sed on permissible syllable types 
in the L 1 may cause Spanish speakers to pronounce the word "school" 
as Icskull. Still, a basic tenet of the mudel is thai many 12 production 
errors have a perceptual basis. 
The postulates and hypolheses Ihat comprise the current version 
of the SLM are presented in Table 1. The hypotheses derive from the 
postulates , and from empirical data presented in previous articles 
and chapters (see, e.g., Flege 1981, 1988b, 1991a, 1992a,b). It should 
be emphasized that this is a working model and is subject to further 
revision as new data are gathered . Regardless of whether the SLM is 
ultimately supported or disconfirmed , it serves as a useful heuristic 
for planning research. Also, it generates testable predictions and can 
be used to organize and interpret a wide range of empirical data. In 
th~ following section we discuss the model's hypotheses in general 
terms, and illustrate how they apply to important questions pertain­
ing to students of L2 learning . Specific hypotheses are indicated by 
boldface (e.g., H4, H7, and so on). 
The SLM differs from other approaches to L2 acquisition in 
important ways. According to the model's first hypothesiS (Hl), learn­
ers perceptually relate positional allophones in the L2 to the closest 
positionally defined al~ophone (or "sound ") in the L 1. Weinreich 
(1957) referred to L1 and L2 sounds that have been linked perceptually 
in this way as "diaphones ." The phonetic level of analysis envisaged 
by Ht is less abstract than the phonemic level of Contrastive Analysis 
(e.g., Lada 1957), but is, neverthdess , an abstract level of organization . 
Even within a single phonetic context, the production of a position­
sensitive allophone is apt to vary conSiderably according to such fac­
tors as' speaking rale, degree of stress, the talker's age and gender, and 
speaking style or clarity (Lindblom 1990a,b). 
Support for HI comes from evidence that L2 learners are more 
successful at producing and perceiving certain allophones of English 

--- Page 8 ---
Second-Language Speech Learning I 239 
Table I. Postulates and hypotheses forming a speech learning model (SlM) of 
second language sound acquisition. 
Postulates 
P1 The mechanisms and processes used in learning the II sound system, 
including category formation , remain intact over the life span, and can be 
applied to l2 learning. 
P2 language -specific aspects of speech sounds are specified in long-term 
memory representations called phonetic categories. 
Pl Phonetic categories established in childhood for II sounds evolve over the 
life span to reneet the proper1ies of allll or l2 phones identified as a real-
ization of each category. . 
P4 Bilinguals strive to maintain contrast between 11 and L2 phonetic cate­
gories, which exist in a common phonological space. 
Hypotheses 
H1 Sounds in the 11 and l2 are related perceptually to one another at a posi· 
tion·sensitive allophonic level, rather than at a more abstract phonemic 
level. 
H2 A new phonetic category can be established for an l2 sound that diHers 
phonetically from the closest II sound if bilinguals discern atleasl some of 
the phonetic differences between the II and l2 sounds. 
Hl The greater the perceived phonetic dissimilarity between an l2 sound and 
the closest II sound, the more likely it is that phonetic differences between 
the sounds will be discerned. 
H4 The likelihood of phonetic differences between II and L2 sounds, and 
between l2 sounds that are noncontrastive in the L 1, being discerned 
decreases as AOl increases . 
HS Category formation for an 12 sound may be blocked by the mechanism of 
equivalence classification . When this happens, a single phonetic category 
will be used to process perceptually linked II and L2 sounds (diaphones). 
Evenlually , the diaphones will resemble one another in production. 
H6 The phonetic category established for l2 sounds by a bilingual may differ 
from a monolingual 's if: 1) the bilingual's category is '"deflected'" away from 
an II category 10 maintain phonetic conlrast between categories in a com­
mon ll-12 phonological space; or 2) the bilingual's representation is based 
on different features, or feature weights, than a monolingual's . 
H7 The production of a sound eventually corresponds to the properties repre­
st:nted in ils phonetic category representation . 
phonemes than others. For example, native Japanese (NJ) speakers 
have difficulty producing and perceiving English /11 and / J/. This is 
because Japanese has just one liquid, whereas English has two. 
However , allophones of English / JI and 11/ differ phonetically and 
are learned by non-native speakers at different rates and to differing 
extents. For example , NJ learners of English characteristically perceive 
and produce English liquids more accurately in word-final than word­
initial position (Strange 1992), perhaps because the acoustic difference 

--- Page 9 ---
240 I Flege 
between English / J/ and /1/ is more robust in final than initial posi­
tion (Sheldon and Strange 1~82). Another possible explanation for the 
word-position. effect is that final but not initial allophones of English 
I JI and /II are categorized differently by NJ learners of English. 
Takagi (1993) examined the perceived relation between Japanese /T/, 
English hi, and English III. Native Japanese subjects who had 
arrived recently in the United States used katakana symbols to write 
English nonsense words presented auditorily. As expected from loan­
word phonology data, English flV / and / JV / syllables were written 
with the symbols for Japanese IrV /. However, whereas tokens of 
word-final EngHsh / J/ were written as "a" (78% of instances), word­
final /1/ tokens were written as "ru" (53%) or "0" (30% of instances). 
Rochet (this volume) suggested that all L2 vowels are identified 
as realizations of an existing L1 vowel category. Best, McRoberts, and 
Sithole (1988) suggested that foreign consonants are judged to be real· 
izations of an L1 consonant, or else are heard as nonspeech (but d. Best 
this volume). However, many L2 production studies have provided 
indirect evidence that, over lime, L21earners take note in some way of 
cross·language phonetic diiferences (e.g., Wenk 1979; Hammarberg 
1988,1990; Wieden 1990). According to the model's second hypothesis 
(H2), bilinguals sometimes establish a new phonetic category repre­
sentation for sounds in the L2. And, according to H7, L2 sounds will 
eventually be produced as specified in phonetic category representa· 
tions. If the new phonetic category established by a bilingual for an L2 
sound matches native speakers', then the L2 sound will be produced 
accurately. 
According to H3, the likelihood of cross·language phonetic dif· 
ferences being discerned iucreases with degree of perceived cross­
language phonetic differen ce. There is evidence, for example, that 
Japanese Irl (despite its symbolization) is closer perceptually to 
English III than IJ/,(Sekiyama and Tohkura 1993; Takagi 1993). This 
leads to the-expectatiun thai a larger proportion of Japanese learners 
of English will discern some or all of the phonetic differences between 
Japanese Ir I and English I jl than between Japanese Irl and English 
II/.. H4 states that the likelihood of cross·language phonetic differ· 
ences being discerned decreases wilh AOL. So, for example, more 
German·speaking l()...year olds than adults should discern the phonetic 
difference between English / a!1 and the closest German vowel (proba­
bly le/J, In fact, Ihe perceived distance between lEI and lrel vowels 
is greater for German children than adults (Butcher 1976); and German 
adults but not children have difficulty discriminating leI and lrel in 
an oddity task (Weiher 1975; see Figure 2 below). 
As mentioned earlier, neurological maturation is often identified 
as the cause .of foreign accentedness. Patkowski (1990, p. 87) suggested 

--- Page 10 ---
Second·Language Speech Learning 124 r 
that "the difference between child and adult learners (of speech and 
language) is of a fundamental, qualitative nature" and that preadoles­
cent versus postadolescent L2 learners represent "different popula­
tions" of learners. We might suppose that if L2 production accuracy 
were limited by maturation, such a limitation would apply across the 
board to the full range of L2 sounds that differ phonetically from 
sounds in the L1. On the other hand, H3 and H4 predict that fewer 
sounds in the L2 will be produced accurately as AOL increases (both 
in terms of the range of sounds and the proportion of bilinguals). 
Degree of foreign accent is correlated with the number of segmental 
errors (e.g., Brennan , Ryan and Dawson 1975). Thus, the linear 
increase of foreign accent with AOL shown in Figure 1 seems to agree 
better with the SLM than with the prediction generated by a neurolog­
ical maturation hypothesis . 
A failure to discern cross-language phonetic differences may arise 
at one or more processing levels. In some circumstances, listeners can 
gain access to the sensory properties which distinguish pairs of unfa­
miliar L2 sounds (Miyawaki et al. 1975; Werker and Tees 1984; Mann 
1986), or L1 and L2 sounds (Rege 1984; Rege and Munro 1994). How­
ever, they may fail to do so during the on-line processing of speech. 
Speech perception becomes automatic during L1 speech development 
(e.g., Linell 1982), which frees resources for other processing tasks 
(e,g., Mayberry and Eichen 1991). This may cause learners to attend 
less to phonetic detail when learning L2 than L1 sounds. Listeners 
may fail to gain access to sensory properties associated with certain U 
sounds as the result of pre-attentive processes. Neisser (1976, p. 20) 
spoke of "anticipatory schemata" that "prepare the perceiver to accept 
certain kinds of information rather than others." Jusczyk (1992, 1993) 
later posited the existence of automatic interpretative schemes that 
determine which properties of incoming words are attended to in 
early stages of processing . It is also possible that sensory information 
that has initially been processed is discarded at a later processing 
stage by non ~native speakers as nondistinctive , or that nOll-natives 
weight features differently than do NE speakers {e.g., Weinreich 1953; 
Rege and Hillenbrand 1986,1987; Flege 1988}, 
Traditionally, the term "interference" has applied only to the influ­
ence of the L1 on the producti on of an L2. According to H5 and H6, 
however, cross-language phonetic interference is bidirectional in 
nature. The model predicts two different effects of 12 learning on the 
production of sounds in an L1, depending upon whether or not a new 
category has been established for an 12 sound in the same portion of 
phonological space as an L1 sound. Previous shtdies have supported 
HS by showing that L1 and 1.2 sounds that are perceptually linked to 
one another (diaphones) come to resemble one another in production. 

--- Page 11 ---
2421 Flege 
For example, F1ege (1987a) found that bilinguals produced stops in their 
L1 with VOT values resembling those typical for stops in the L2 (see 
also Peng 1993). 
H6 was added recently to the model. It is based on the observa­
tion that in the vowel system of languages, vowels tend to disperse so 
as t~ maintain suHicient auditory contrast (e.g., Liljencrants and 
Lindblom 1972;.Lindblom 1990b). Recently obtained L2 production 
data (Bohn and Flege 1992) led us to accept that a bilingual 's Ll and 
L2 categories exist ill a comlllOll phonological space. By hypothesis, a 
bilingual 's L1 and L2 vowels disperse so as to maintain contrast with­
in that individual 's phonolo~ ;ica) space. If 50, then a category estab­
lished by a bilingual for an 1.2 vowel may be "deflected" away from 
an L1 yowel, and so differ from a native speaker's category for the L2 
vowel sound. 
Analogies to H6 can be found in historical sound change and 
dialect geography . As languages change, the raising of vowel A may 
precipitate the raising of 5, ...... hich then causes C to rise. As the result 
of such push chains, the vowels A, 13, and C may be produced differ· 
ently, while the contrasts between them are preserved (Martinet 1955). 
Moulton (1945) observed that in Swis~ German dialects that had an 
lre/; the vowel lal was produced with backed variants. In I~/-Iess 
.. dialects, on the other hand, I al was produced with central, or even 
fronted, variants. The results of a case study by Mack (1990) were con­
sistent with H6. Acoustic measurements revealed that a 10-year-old 
boy who spoke French at home and English elsewhere produced 
Ib d gl with short-lag voice-onset time (VOT) values in both French 
and English. He produced Ip t kl with VOT values averaging 66 ms 
in French, but with values averaging 108 ms in English. Thus, this 
child mahaglld to maintain IJltonetic cOlltrast between three categories 
in his L1 and L2, but at the cost of producing I p t k/ inaccurately in 
both languages (i.e., with VOT values that were too long for both 
French and English). 
The kinds of Ll production changes predicted by H5 and H6 are 
consistent with an incidental finding of a study by Flege, Munro, and 
MacKay (1995a). The 240 NI ~peakers who participated were a~kt.>d to 
evaluat~ their own ability to pronounce Italian and English. There was 
a modest negative correlation between self-estimated ability tu pro· 
nounce the L1 and L2. The Nt subjecl ~ who began learning English 
before the age of 12 years s.lid they pronounced English better than 
Italian; whereas, the reverse held true for those who began learning 
English later in life. Very few (6%) of the Nl subjects pre· and post­
adolescent learners indicated that they could speak both English and 
Italian without accent, including subjects who used English and Italian 
with equal frequency. 

--- Page 12 ---
Second-Language Speech Learning I 243 
H6 specifies a second circumstance in which a category established 
for an L2 sound by a non-native speaker may differ from a native 
speaker's category. This is predicted if the non-native speaker's ph<>­
netic category is based on different features than the native speaker's, 
which could arise if an L2 sound is distinguished from other L2 
sounds by features not exploited in the L1. This important revision of 
the SLM leads us to expect that, even when categories are established 
for an L2 sound, the U sound might tlOt be produced exactly as it is pro­
duced by native speakers. Thus, the model no longer predicts "mastery" 
of certain L2 sounds, and the model is ·now congruent with Grosjean's 
view of bilingualism . Grosjean (1989) suggested that the Hmixing" of 
the L1 and L2 is inevitable, because a bilingual's two language sys­
tems are both constantly engaged . This view implies that bilinguals do 
not "switch" between two distinct phonetic systems, at least not as has 
been assumed traditionally.1 
PRODUCTION AND PERCEPTION OF VOWELS 
The SLM generates specific predictions concerning the production and 
perception of l2 vowels. First, even adult l2 learners are likely to dis­
cern the phonetic differences between certain LI and L2 vowels, espe­
cially if Ihe LI has fewer vowels than Ihe L2 (e.g., the 5-vowel system 
of Spanish in comparison to the IS-vowel English system). When this 
happens , new phonetic categories will be established for the L2 vow­
els (H2), and the L2 vowels will eventually be produced as specified 
in their phonetic category representations (H7). By H3, the greater the 
perceived distance of an L2 vowel from the closest Ll vowel, the 
greater is the likelihood that a new category will be established for the 
L2 vowel. So, for example , a native Spanish (NS) speaker should be 
more likely to establish a phonetic category for English /tr.1 or /&/ 
than for English Iii (which differs only slightly from Spanish Iii). By 
H4, a native Spanish a-year old should be more likely to establish a 
category for English Iff/ and la-I than a native Spanish I6-year old. 
The model predicts different effects of L2 learning on the produc­
lion of L2 vowels, depending upon whether or not a new category has 
been established for an L2 vowel. For example. using an orthographic 
classification task, Flege (199Ic) showed that Spanish speakers with lit­
tle or no experience in English tend to identify English hr./ tokens as 
realizations of their Spanish /a/ category. If Spanish learners of English 
persist in doing so, and are, thereby, unable to establish a category for 
English 1 .... 1, Ihe model predicls that they will produce English 1 .... 1 
'Mack (1989) claimed, for example, thai the "dominant" language may remain 
"impervious " to an influence by the nondominant language, at Jeast for certain pho­
nellc dimensions . 

--- Page 13 ---
2441 Flege 
with Spanish / a/ -like properties, and vice ver<'.xl. (That is, their L2 / 11!/ 
will have F2 (second formant) values that are too low, and their L1 /a/ 
will have F2 values that are too high.) However, if a category is estab­
lished for English lre/, then the model predicts accurate production 
unless the Spanish'learner's new English /re/ category is deflected 
away from Spanish /a/. An indirect consequence of a "deflection" 
would be a lowering of F2 values in Spanish /a/ (Le., a backing of 
Spanish /al in phonological space away from English lce/). Although 
testable, the data now available are insufficient t'O support or disconfirm 
such hypotheses. One, gap in the literature is the virtual absence of work 
examining bilinguals' production of L1 vowels (but see Bohn and Flege 
1992). The general pattern of available data reviewed below, however, 
are consistent with the framework just outlined. 
Categorial Discrimination of L 1 and L2 Vowels 
Best (1994) observed that I'ropcrtie s defining category membership 
are likely to differ from those defining the systematic relationship 
among categories. Perceptual training data obtained by Morosan and 
Jamieson (1989) suggested that learning to distinguish a sound, X, 
from another sound, Y, will not necessarily generalize to an X-Z con­
trast because cues to an X-Y contrast Inay not suffice to distinguish X 
from Z. Thus, the notion "phonetic category" implies the perceptual 
ability to: 1) identify a wide range of different phones as being "the 
same," despite auditorily detectable differences between them along 
dimensions that are not phonetically relevant; and 2) ability to distin­
guish the multiple exemplars of a category from realizations of other 
categories, even in the face of noncriterial commonalities (Kluender, 
Diehl, and Killeen 1987). 
A two-alternative forced-choice (2AFC) identification test is not 
well suited as a test of category formation . For example, Flege and 
Bohn (1989) examined NS subjects' identification of vowels in beat-bit 
(Ii-II) and bet-bat (le.-rel) continua . In both, Fl (first formant> fre­
quency and vowel duration were varied orthogonally. The NS sub­
jects managed to partition both continua into two response categories, 
but in neither instance did the data provide compelling evidence for 
the establishment of categories for vowels not found in Spanish 
(namely, /a:.1 anJ II/). As discusseu by Bohn (this volume), many NS 
subjects identified members of the beat-bit continuum based primarily 
on vowel duration rather than on spectral quality, as was the case for 
NE subjects. These NS subjects may have based their identifications 
on a readily available auditory property (duration) rather than by ref­
erencing incoming stimuli to two distinct long-term memory repre­
sentations. An over-reliance on duration was not evident for the bet-bat 
continuum . However, evidence obtained by Flege (1991c) suggested 

--- Page 14 ---
Second-Language Speech Learning I 245 
that some of the NS subjects may have identified endpoints of this 
continuum (lEI and Ir./l in terms of two distinct Spanish categories 
(lei and laf). 
An oddity discrimination task has been used in L2 research to 
determine if learners can discriminate various L2 sounds (e.g., Weiher 
1975; Lamminmaki 1979), and might be used to test for category forma­
tion. Gottfried (1983) administered an ABX (3 stimuli: A, B always dif­
ferent) "categorial" discrimination task (see Beddor and Gottfried this 
volume) to French nalive speakers and inexperienced NE speakers of 
French. Triads of stimuli contained potentially confusable French 
vowels. As expected, the NE subjects made more errors than the 
French subjects (25% vs. 17%), especially on triads containing the front 
rounded vowels lyre "I, which do not occur in English. The lack of a 
categorical representation for French front rounded vowels may have 
contributed to errors by the NE subjects. 
Flege, Munro, and Fox (1995) modified the categorial discrimi­
nation task to discourage within-category discrimination, and to 
encourage subjects to group sounds into plJOndiclllly rdewllt equiva­
lence classes. As in the Gottfried (1983) study, the three stimuli in each 
triad were spok~n by different talkers to encourage responses in a 
general rather than token-specifi c mode (e.g., Mullinex, Pisani, and 
Martin 1989; Uchanski et al. 1991). The inter-stimulus interval between 
the men"lhers of each triad was somewhat longer than the one used by 
Gottfried (983) to further reduce the possibility that correct responses 
could be based on information in auditory short-term memory (see, 
e.g., Ferrero et al. 1979; Werker and Logan 1985). Finally, the inclusion 
of "catch" triads, which consisted of realizations of a single category 
spoken by three different talkers (correct response : "no odd item out") 
encouraged subjects to respond only to phonetically relevant differences, 
not merely auditorily detectable ones.2 
Table II summarizes the results obtained by Flege, Munro, and 
Fox (1995) for NE speakers and groups of native Spanish subjects who 
were relatively experienced (NS-1) or inexperienced (NS-2) in English. 
The pattern of between-group differences varied as a function of the 
acoustic and articulatory differences between the vowel contrasts tested. 
The subjects in all three groups readily discriminated Spanish /al 
tokens from realizations of English leI, Iii and /1/. However, for 
triads testing the categorial discrimination of Spanish tal versus 
English /01, Significantly lower percent correct scores were obtained 
--_.-----------------------------------
Tfhe categoria l discrimination task just described did not require training and 
obviated problems seen in identification tasks where listeners must choose from • large 
set of response alternatives . or in tasks thai make use oC written key words. 

--- Page 15 ---
2461 Flege 
from the NS-1 and the NS-2 subjects than from NE subjects. For triads 
testing the I~/-/E/, and la/-/~I contrasts, the subjects in NS-2 but 
not in NS-1 responded correctly significantly less often than did the 
NE subjects (p < .05). 
These results were interpreted to mean that the NS subjects iden­
tified Spanish and English vowels that are distant from one another in 
phonological space (Moulton 1945) in terms of two distincl categories; 
whereas, they were less likely to do so for less distant pairs of vowels. 
The NE'subjects were likely to have performed well on triads testing 
the contrast between Spanish /a/ and the English vowels leI and 
/1£,/ because they identified Spanish /a/ tokens as realizations of 
English /0/ (and, thus, distinct from the other two English vowels). 
The fact that inexperienced but not experienced NS subjects per­
formed more poorly than did the NE subjects on la/-lEI and 
a/-/fr,f contrasts suggests that some of the experienced NS subjects 
may have established categories for /e/ and /Il!/, neither of which 
occur phonemicaUy in Spanish. 
Flege, Munro, and Fox (1995, Experiment 1) provided additional 
evidence of categorical effects on the perception of L2 vowels. Native 
English and NS subjects rated pairs of Spanish and English vowels for 
degree of dissimilarity using a nine-point scale. The results for five 
different vowel pairs containing a Spanish / a/ token and a token of 
English IiI, 1./, lEI, I~/, or IAI are shown in Figure 2. The NE sub­
jects rated la/-lEI and .fa/-/re/ pairs <is si3nificantly more dissimi­
lar than did experienced (NS·1) or inexperienced (NS-2) native 
Spanish subjects.} It appears that the NE subjects were more likely 
than the NS subjects to identify vowels in la/-/EI and la/-I.,I 
pairs as realizations of two phonetically distinct categories and that this 
augmented the degree of perceived vowel dissimilarity. 
The NE and NS subjects responded to other vowel pairs in much 
the same manner, however. Both the NE and NS subjects rated the 
vowels in /a/-/A/ pairs as very similar, probably because all subjects 
heard ~ealizalions of a Single vowel c,ltegory. The NE and NS subjects 
agreed in rating the vowels in /a/-/II pairs as somewhat less dissim­
ilar than vowels in la/-/il pairs. Vowels in both of these pairs were 
likely to have been classified differently by all subjects, and so the 
common response by the NE and NS subjects may have reflected 
degree.of auditory difference . Although not shown in Figure 2, the NS 
subjects rated English Iii-Ill pairs as significantly more Similar than 
did the NE subjects. This finding, when taken together with converging 
evidence obtained using other paradigms (Flege and Bohn 1989; Flege 
'Different sub;ects participated in the similarity rating experiment (Experiment 1) 
and in the calegorial discrimination lest (Experiment 2) mentioned earlier. 

--- Page 16 ---
Second·Language Speech Learning I 247 
Table II. Percentage of correct responses obtained from native speakers of 
English and Spanish in a calegorial discrimina tion task." 
Subject group 
Vowel Contrast NEb NS·l' NS-2' 
Ia/-N 98(4) 95(6) 95(5) 
la/-/&! 91(15) 96(7) 89(17) 
Ia/-/." 98(5) 95 (5) 97(6) 
/a/-/</ 80(29) 66 (26) 51(27) 
/a/-/"" 77(31) 59 (24) 38(25) 
/a/-/o/ 57(36) 26 (18) 18(5) 
·Triads of stimuli tested the contrast between tokens of Spanish Ial and tokens of 
English /v.lv./ev./e/, 1Je/ and 10/ (data are ftom flege, Munro. and fox 1995). 
bNE, monolinguat native speakers of English. 
eNS·1, relatively experienced Spanish speakers of English. 
dNS-2, inexperienced Spanish speakers of English. 
9 
~ 8 -c: 
CO --.E 7 
If) 
.'il 6 0 
"0 
C1) 5 .> 
fl 4 ~ 
C1) 
0. 3 c: 
CO 
C1) 2 ::ii: 
1 " • o • to. fv 
III 
lzel 
1£1 
ItJ 
Figure 2. The mean perceived dlsslmtlarlly of vowel pairs by English­
speaking listeners (EN-A, EN· B), relatively experienced native Spanish 
speakers of English (NS-l), and relatively inexperienced Spanish speakers of 
English (NS-2). Multiple tokens of Spanish /a/ were paired with tokens of 
English lit, /1/, /re/, /e/, and /0/ (data are from Rege. Munro. and Fox 
1994. Experiment 1). . 

--- Page 17 ---
2481 Flege • 
1991 C), suggests indirectly that some NS speakers of English detect the 
allditory difference between Iii and III tokens, although they do not 
categorize these vowels as different. This is consistent with the model's 
claim that changes in L2 production can come about even when phonetic 
differences between Ll and L2 sounds are not discerned (i.e., when 
phonetic category formation is blocked by equivalence classification). 
Flege (1995) used the categorial discrimination task described ear­
lier to assess the perception of English vowels b~' non-native subjects 
differing in L1 background . The study's aims were to: 1) determine if 
the non-natives would fail to discrimin ate English vowels that could be 
discriminated by NE subjects; and 2) In determine if the non-natives' 
pattern of diSClCiminative failures would vary according to the nature of 
their L1 vowel inventory. The /bVtl words used as stimuli were spo­
ken at a relatively rapid rale by five NE speakers .· Fourteen vowel con­
trasts (e.g., IiI vs. 1.1> were tested by cight "change" triads, in which 
there was an odd item out, and by eight "catch" triads, which consist'ed 
of three different realizations of a single vowel category. 
Figure 3 presents data obtained from 10 NE subjects and from 36 
of the non-nativ e subjects tested (6 L1 backgrounds x 6 talkers). The 
non-natives were slightly older than the NE subjects (M = 35 vs. 31 
years). They'arrived in the United States at an average age of 27 years 
(range: 14-52 years) and had lived there for an average of 7 years 
(range: 0.6-38 years). The size of the non-native subjects' L1 vowel 
inventories appeared to influence whether they did, or did not, differ­
entially classify certain English vowels. Of the six non-native groups 
shown in the figure, only the native Spanish and Portuguese subjects 
made significantly more errors on the catch triads (20% and 21 'Yo, 
respcct'ive ly) than did the NE subjects (2%). For change tdads, far 
more errors were made by the native Portuguese and Spanish subjects 
(26%,27%) than by the NE subjects (4fft.). The German and Dutch sub­
jects also made more errors 00%, 12%) than did the NE subjects. Given 
that German and Dutch have more vowels than either Portuguese or 
Spanish, speakers of the former language s were probably more likely 
to identify two different English vowels in lerms of different L1 vowel 
categories than were speakers of the latter language s. 
A failure to discriminate two English vowels was said to have 
occurred when the six subjects in an L1 group responded Significantly 
less often to the change triads testing the contrast between those 
English vowels Ihan in responding to tdads testing at least three other 
English vowel contrasts. Just one such discriminative failure was noled • 
'Although this reduced the spectral and temporal contrasts seen in carefully artic­
ulated English vowels. all vowels were readily identifiable as intended by NE listeners. 

--- Page 18 ---
~ 
I " Z ~Qnd-l~n84~Re SPl'f'Ch learning I 249 
8 
7 
0 
~ 
4 Span. 3 
2 Port. 1 
'"" 'i' .... :I: ~9P~<6:"?O . .:...-~ NO" _ % 0 ~ '" 
8 
7 
8 
6 
4 
3 • Out. 
2 .. Ger . , 
'I' ---
~ 99~- <=000 ._ .... X .:. 
fd " 0 ~ " .; %" ~ 
8 ~~:::::;j~~~~ 7 
8 
5 
4 
3 
2 , Ker. 
Ara. 
Figure 3. Data (rom a calegorlal discrimination study by Fltlge (1994) in 
which subjects attempted to choose the odd item oulln triads !eliling 14 
English vowel contrasts , The subjects were 10 native .peaken pf English 
(open circles), and 6 native speakers each of Spanllih .nd Portuguese (top), 
German and Dutch (middle), and Korean and Arabic (bottom). 
for the German subjects (/e/-/8!/), and two for the Dutch subjects 
(/u/-/u/, and lo/-/A/). Four such failures were noted for the 
Portuguese subjects (/e/-/l/, /e/-/ .. /, /0/-/./, and /u/-/ull. five 
for the Spanish subjects (/0/-/./, luI-luI, /e/-(./, /e/-/l,,/, and 
/"/-/0/), and four for the native Arabic subjects (fe/-/l/, /e/-/",/, 
lui-lui, and /0/-/./). 

--- Page 19 ---
250 I Flege 
The pattern of discriminative failures noted by Flege (995) is 
consistent with the hypothesis that L2 learners will have difficulty 
discriminating a pair of English vowels if both vowels are identified 
in terms of a single Ll category (Best this volume), For example, the 
midvo,!"eis Ie 0/ of the five-vowel Spanish inventory <Ii e a 0 uf) 
can be realized as IE} and [:J]. The lEI of the seven-vowel Portuguese 
inventory (Ii e E a a ~ un is often realized as [",I (Major 1987a). The 
Portuguese subjects may have managed 10 discriminate /~/-/o/ by 
virtue of identifying English /a!/ tokens in terms of Portuguese fE/, 
and'English /0/ tokens in terms of Portugue se /a/. The native 
Spanish subjects, on the other hand, may have failed 10 discriminate 
/~/-/a/ because Ihey identified realiz.ations of both English vowels in 
terms of Spanish /a/ (see Flege 1991d. Similarly , the native Spanish 
subjects may have failed to discriminate /E/-/'/ either because real­
izations of both English categories were identified as realizations of 
the Spanish /el category (Flege 1991d, or because Iwitller vowel could 
be categorized in terms of an L1 vowl!! (Dest 1994). 
An unresolved question at present is how, or if, the kinds of dis­
criminative "failures just .reported relate to the productioH of English 
vowels. The model predicts that if a bilingual is unable to discriminate 
categorially an L2 vowel from neighboring L2 vowels, as well as from 
neighboring L 1 vowels that are distinct phonetically from the L2 vowel, 
then the L2 vowel will be produced inaccurately. To my knowledge , 
this has never been tested directly. However, the data now available 
are consistent with the hypothe sis that certain L2 vowel production 
errors arise from discriminative failures. 
Flege (1995) found that native Korean (NK) subjects failed to dis­
criminate English IE/-/oel and Iii_hi.! This is understandable in 
the light of vowel production and perception data obtained in an un­
published study by Flege .and Yang, which examined the production 
of English /i • E;r./ in a Ib_t/ context by NK subjects from Seoul. The 
NK subjects began learning English in the United States as adults. The 
10 subjects in groHp NK-l had lived in the United States between 4 
and 18 years (M = 7.3 years), the 10 subjects in NK-2 for just 1.5 years 
(M = 0.8 years). Vowels spoken by NE subjects were identified cor­
rectly in nearly every instance by native English-speaking listeners , 
whereas vowels spoken by the subjects in grBups NK-l and NK-2 
were often misidentified. Intended Iii tokens were heard as /II (33% 
of instances), 1.1 as IiI (23%), leI as l.e/ (19%). and lrel as lEI (70% 
of instances). The rate of misidentifications of vowels spoken by the 
two Korean groups did not differ Significantly. 
'The other discriminative failures noted for NK subjects were lui-lot, /0/-/"/, 
/e/-/l/. 

--- Page 20 ---
Second·Language Speech Learning 1251 
When plotted in an F1 x F2 acoustic space, the Koreans' productions 
of English IiI and III showed substantially more overlap than did vow­
els spoken by the NE subjects. However, the NK subjects produced a 
larger temporal contrast between IiI and /II (56 ms, or 45%) than did 
the NE subjects (30 ms, 21%). The NK subjects' 1.1 and /leI producHons 
also showed much spectral overlap. However, although the NE subjects 
made 1",1 longer than lEI (by 56 ms, or 31.,,), the NK subjects did not 
produce a temporal difference between these vowels. The NK subjects 
also identified members of the benl-bit ·(fi/-/11l and bel-bal (/e/-/fell 
continua (see Flege and Bohn 1989). Changes in Fl frequency had a far 
larger effect on NE subjects' identification of vowels in both vowel ron­
tinua than did changes in duration. The NK subject'S showed a substan­
tially greater effect of duration changes than did NE subjects when iden­
tifying members of the bent-bit continuum, but they did not respond 
systematicaUy to changes in vowel duration in the bet-blt continuum. 
Korean is ohef'! analyzed as having a phonemic length contrast 
between IiI and liJ, but this distinction is being merged in modern 
Seoul Korean (Magen and Blumstein 1993). Other evidence points to 
the merger of two Korean vowels in the portion of the phonological 
space occupied by English 1.1 and 1.,1. We might infer that the NK 
subjects tested by Flege and Yang (unpublished) incorrectly judged 
the duration difference between Iii and /II to be more important 
than the spectral difference between these EngHsh vowels by analogy 
to the Korean /i/-/i:/ distinction produced by an older generation of 
speakers of Seoul Korean. The NK subjects may have been unable to 
make any "phonetic sense" of the English 1e.I-ltel contrast, on the 
other hand, because neither temporal nor spectral cues are used sys­
tematically to distinguish vowels in this portion of the Korean vowel 
space. This could explain the NK subjects' failure to discriminate 
le/-/rel and Ii/-III in the categorial discrimination test (Flege 
1995). We might speculate that it is especially difficult for non-natives 
to discriminate two L2 vowels if phones resembling realizations of the 
L2 vowels occur in free variation in the Ll. 
The protocol used by Flege and Yang (unpublished) was adminis­
tered to native German subjects by Bohn and F1ege (1990. 1992) and to 
native Spanish subjects (Flege, 801m, and Schmidt, unpublished). The 
NS subjects in the Flege et a1. study had aU begun learning English as 
adults. The subjects in N5-1 had lived in the United States for an aver­
age of 9.0 years, those in NS-2 for just 0.5 years on average. Vowels 
produced by NS and NE subjects were presented for forced-choice 
identification to native English-speaking listeners. As mentioned earli­
er, the NE subjects' vowels were identified at near·perfect rates. The 
correct identification rates obtained for the subjects in NS-1 were lower 
than those obtained for NE subjects (fi/-57.", 11/-<'1 %,1£/-99%, 

--- Page 21 ---
2521 Flege 
"</-73% correct), and those for NS-2 subjects were lower still (fi/ -69%, 
/1/-51 %, /£/-91%, and /,,-/-70%). 
Spme NS subjects showed bidirectional errors in producing English 
IiI and /1/ (i.e., their IiI attempts were heard as /1/, and vice versa), 
Acoustic analyses revealed that the NS subjects' productions of IiI and 
/1/ showed far more spectral overlap in an Fl-F2 space than did vowels 
spoken by the NE subjects. These prodllction data suggested that at least 
some of the NS subjects failed. to discern the phonetic contrast between 
English /i/ and /1/, however , the NS subjects tested perceptually by 
Flege (1995) managed to discriminate English IiI versus /1/ categori· 
lIny. Two explanations for this apparent discrepan cy are possible. First, 
different NS subjects participated in the two studies. II is possible that 
more sub)ects in the Aege (1995) study Ih1'.11 in the Aege et a!. (unpulr 
Iished) study had established a phonetic category for English /1/. 
Alternatively, the subjects in the F1ege et al. study rnay have established 
an /1/ category in which duration figured rnore prominently than it 
does in NE speakers' categories. These subjects produced temporal con­
trasts between English lit and /1/ resembling those of NE subjects, 
although Spanish does not use duration to contrast vowel phonemes. 
Bahn (this volume) suggested that adult L2 learners may be more atten­
tive to temporal than spectral ales to a novel L2 phonetic contrast. 
According to the model, the production of an 12 vowel will change 
if a ca.tegory is established for it. The production of an L2 vowel may 
also change if a new category is not established. This is predicted to 
happen if the phonetic category used to prccer.s an L2 vowel that is 
linked Perceptually to L1 vowel (diaphone) changes to reflect a two­
language source of input. Both developrnents should lead to more 
native-like productions of L2 vowels, although the former might result 
in more rapid and dramatic changes in L2 production than the latter. 
A number of studies have shown that late learners' productions 
of L2 vowels become more native-like as they gain experience in their 
1..2, and that subjects who pronoun ce their L2 well overall produce L2 
vowels better than less proficient speakers from the same Ll back­
ground. For example, acoustic measurements by Flege (1987b) revealed 
that experienced but not inexperienced NE speakers of French produced 
French Iyl accurately . Wang (1988) found that relatively experienced 
but not inexperienced Mandarin speakers of English produced a signifi­
cant spectral difference between two English vowels not distinguished 
in the L1 (namely Iii and /II). Three studies showed Significant im­
provements in the production of English lcel by native speakers of 
L1s in which /8!/ does not occur phonemic::tli y; namely, Portuguese 
(Major 1987a), German (Bahn and F1ege 1992), and Dutch (F1ege 1992b). 
The literature provides indirect support for H5, which predicts a 
kind of "merger" of Ll and L2 vowels that have been equated percep­
tually, and H6, whicJl predicts the deflection of a new L2 vowel category 

--- Page 22 ---
Second-Language Speech Learning 12SJ 
away from the category for a neighboring L1 vowel(s). In the study by 
Major (1987a), Portuguese subjects' production of English /E/ deterio­
rated as their production of lrel improved. In a cross-sectional study, 
Flege (1992b) found that Dutch subjects' production of English lui, 
which is more fronted than Dutch luI, deteriorated as they gained 
proficiency in English. Balm and F1ege (1992) found that inexperienced 
German subjects produced English lei less accurately than did more 
experienced subjects, despite the fact that leI has a close counterpart 
in German. HS and H6 will need to be investigated more closely by 
examining longitudinal changes in the production of vowels in both 
the l2 and the Ll, as well as concomitant changes in the discriminabil­
ity of pairs of L2 vowels, and pairs of adjacent Ll and L2 vowels. 
Most non-native subjects examined in the vowel production studies 
just cited had never lived in an English-speaking country, or else had 
done 50 for less than 8 years. The results of two recent studies suggest 
that certain vowel errors persist in the speech of highly experienced U 
learners. Munro (1993) found that many English vowels spoken by 
native Arabic subjects who had lived in the United States for over 15 
years were judged to be foreign-accented. The Arabic subjects greatly 
exaggerated the duration differences between tense/lax English vowel 
pairs, as if they were Arabic-like long versus short contrasts. It is, there­
fore, possible that use of non-English feature specifications was re­
sponsible for foreign accent in the Arabic subjects' English vowels, as 
stated by H6. 
Although early learners generally produce L2 vowels more accu­
rately than late learners, their productions of l2 vowels do not always 
match perfectly those of native speakers . Data presented by Flege 
(19913) showed that native Spanish speakers who learned English by 
the age of 7 years produced English vowels that were identified as often 
as vowels spoken by NE speakers. The early learners' vowels were not 
scaled for degree of perceived foreign accent, however, and thus, the 
study may have overestimated the early learners' success in producing 
English vowels. Munro, Flege, and MacKay (1995) provided the first 
comprehensive analysis of the effect of AOL on L2 vowel production. 
The subjects were 240 NI subjects who began learning English between 
the ages of 3 and 21 years. These subjects produced English /i lee !C 0 A 
a-0 u u/ in a consonant-vowel-consonant (eVe) context. These English 
vowels vary in acoustic distance from the closest of the seven vowels of 
Italian U i e £ a :> a uf). English vowels produced by nearly all of the 
Italian subjects, even those who began learning English in adulthood, 
were identified correctly .· Assuming that no Italian vowel would be 
"The one exception 10 this was /11./, which was often identified incorrectly when 
produced by subjects who began learning English after the age of 10 years. 

--- Page 23 ---
154/ fI~8e 
identified as English 1.1, he/, I~I or 111/, we might take this to mean 
that these English vowels had been "mastered." 
A very different pattern of results emerged, however, when 
the "Italian subjects' vowels were rated for dpgree of foreign accent. 
Figure 4 presents foreign accent ratings taken from the study by 
Munro, Flege, and MacKay (1995). Shown here are the number of NI 
subjects in subgroups of 24 subjects each whose vowels received a rat­
ing that fell within a 95% confidence interval of the mean rating 
obtained for 2'4 NE subjects. As AOL increased, fewer NI subjects mel 
this criterion, both for English vowels with a counterpart in Italian 
(e.g., jil, lu/) and for English vowel:; without an Italian counterpart 
(e.g., /a!/, ~a-/). Certain English vowds produced by subjects who 
began learning English as children were found ~o be foreign-accented. 
Given that the NI subjects had lived in Canada for over 30 years on 
average and spoke English more often than Italian, the Nt subjects' for- , 
eign-accented productions could not be attributed to a lack of native 
speaker input. 
The discrepancy between the intelligibility data and the foreign 
accent, ratings obtained by Munro, Flege, and MacKay (1995) was 
especially evident for /a-/. Although the Nt subjects' /a-I productions 
were identified correctly in nearly every instance, few Nl subjects 
with an AOL greater than 10 years managed to produce la-I without 
foreign accent. One possible explanation for the accentedness of la-I 
is that, beyond an AOL of about 10 years, Nl subjects failed to attend 
to the retroflex feature (i.e., energy in the region of F3) which is used 
to distingUish 1<>1 from all other English vowels (Terbeek 1977) but 
apparently is not used in Italian. Additional work wi1l be needed to 
test this featural hypothesis and to learn if NI subjects' ability to cale­
gorially discriminate English vowels from other English and Italian 
vowels shows the same effect of AOL as the one seen in Figure 4. 
PRODUCTION AND PERCEPTION Of INITIAL CONSONANTS 
Age of learning exerts an effect on consonant pmduction that is com­
parable to the one described earlier for vowels. Flege, Munro, and 
MaCKay 0995b) examined the production of consonants by 240 NI 
subjects differing in AOL. Native English-speaking listeners identified 
consonants as having been produced "correctly," in a "distorted" 
fashion, or as having been replaced hy some other consonant. Italian 
does not possess a /0/ or /e/. As shown in Figure 5, the NI subjects 
who began learning English in Canada by about the age of 10 years 
were judged to have produced the English fricatives correctly as often 
as did the NE subjects. Beyond that AOL, the number of NI subjects 
who produced them correctly declined precipitously. When the NI 

--- Page 24 ---
24 
22 
'" 20 U 
Q) 18 
B 16 :J en 1. -12 0 
~ 10 Q) .0 8 E 6 :J Z • 2 
0 
24 
22 
'" 20 U 
Q) 18 
"is 16 :J (f) 1. -12 0 
~ 10 Q) .0 8 E 6 :J 
Z • 2 
0 Second·Language Speech Learning I 255 
• bit 
o beat 
• 
o bet 
o 3 6 9 12 15 1621 
Age of arrival (AOL) • book "'c><>-,~ 
o boot 
• Bert 
o but 
o 3 6 9 12 15 16 21 
Age of arrival (AOL) 
Figure 4. The number of subjects in subgroups of 24 whose production of 
English vowels received foreign accent ratings that fell within a 95% confi­
dence interval of the mean ratings obtained for 24 native English (NE) sub­
jects. Subgroups of nalive italian subjects differed according to their ase of 
learning (AOL) English. The NE subjects are designated as having an AOL of 
o years. The vowels shown here are those In beat (III), bit (/If), book (luI>. 
boot (Iu/), kit (/II!/), bd (/e/), Bt!rt (/"'/), and bill (fA/) (from Munro, Flege, 
and MacKay 1995). 
subjects erred in producing /0/ and /9/, it was usually as /d/ and 
/t/, respectively <something never observed for the NE subjects), The 
Italian "r" is a trilled hI rather Ihan a dorsal (or retroflexed) approxi ­
mant / J/, as in English. Age of learning exerted a comparable effect 
on the production of English / J/. 
A principal components analysis (Flege. Munro, and MacKay 
1995C) provided no evidence that attitudinal or motivational factors 
influenced the NI subjects' production of the English consonants. 
Perceptual factors may have been at work, however. Farnetani (1994, 

--- Page 25 ---
2561 F1ese 
80 
70 
;... u 60 .~ 
~ 
0 50 u 
VI 
IU 40 
al .g> 30 
::J "-/J/ -. 
<l< 20 • /8/ 
10 0 /5/ 
o 2 4 6 810121416182022 
Age of arrival in Canada (AOL). in years 
Figure 5. The mean percentage of subjects in subgroups of 24 whose produc· 
lions of English word-initial consonants were judged by native English-speaking 
listeners to be "correct." Subgroups of nalive Italian subjects differed according 
to their age of learning (AOL) English. The NE subjects are designated as hay­
ing an AOL of 0 years (data are from Munro, Rege, and MacKay 1995b). 
personal communication} observed , for example , that Italians tend to 
hear word-initial English /0/ tokens as /d/. II would, therefore, be 
useful to determine if inaccurate production of English /8/ and /~/ 
arises from the kind of "discriminative failure" discussed earlier for 
vowels and if so, whether their frequency increases with AOL, as pre­
dicted by H4. As for I J/, it would be worthwhile to determine if AOL 
influenced the features used by NJ subjects to distinguish I JI from 
other consonant s in English and Italinn. 
Phon.::s such as English IJ] and II] do not occur systematically in 
Japanese. Native Japanese adults' difficulty producing and perceiving 
English I JI and III is well known, but the effect of AOL is only par­
tially understood (but see Yamada Ihis volume). There is evidence, 
however, that Japanese children who learn English produce I JI and 
11/ more accurately than adult learners (Cochrane 1977; see also Yeni­
Komshian and Flege 1993). Yamada and Tohkura (1992b) examined 
the perception of a synthetic I JI to III continuum by Nj subjects dif­
fering in AOL. Subjects exposed to English in the United States by the 

--- Page 26 ---
Second-Languase Speech Learning I 251 
age of 5 years performed in a native-like fashion, as did roughly two­
thirds of subjects first exposed to English between the ages of 5 and 10 
years. However, fewer than one-fourth of the NJ subjects who were 
first exposed to English after the age of 10 years identified the syn­
thetic tokens in a native-like fashion (see also Nakauchi 1993). Thus, a 
question of interest is whether NJ subjects' ability to discern the pho­
netic difference between English / J/ and /11, and between these 
English consonants and the percep~aUy closest Japanese consonant(s) 
declines as AOL increases (H4) and whether a failure to discriminate L1 
and L2 liquids (and glides) leads to production errors (H7). 
Two recent studies provided evidence that, for NJ adults, Japanese 
/r/ is closer perceptually to English /I! than /J/ (5ekiyama and Tohkura 
1993; Takagi 1993). Thus, the model (specifically: H2, H3, H7) predicts 
that NJ adults are more likely to establish a new category for I J/ than 
III, and will, therefore , be more likely to produce English I JI accurately 
Ihan to do so for English /1/. Results obtained by Flege, Takagi, and 
Mann (1995b) were consistent with the model's predictions. This study 
examined the Identification of liquids in naturally produced English 
minimal pairs by three groups of listeners: NE subjects, experienced 
Japanese subjects (NJ-l) who had lived in the United States for more 
than 12 years (M ~ 21), and inexperien ced subjects (NJ-2) who had 
lived in the United Slates for less Ihan 3 years (M ~ 1.6). As expected, 
the NE subjects Identified /1/ and / J/ correctly In nearly every instance. 
As In previous studies wllh native Japa~ese subjects, / J/lokens Were 
identified correctly at higher rates than /I! by the subjects In NJ-1 (92% 
vs. 77% correcl) and NJ-2 (76% vs. 63%). Belore identifying word-Initial 
liquids, the NJ subjects rated the words in which they occurred for 
subjective familiarity . Both NJ groups showed effects of subjective lex­
ical famillarity on their identification of I JI and Ill. For example, they 
correctly Identified the I J/ in room (which Is paired to a less familiar 
word, loom) more often than the I JI in rook (which Is paired to a more 
famUlar word, look). The effect of familiarity on the identification of 
III was equally strong for the two NJ groups. For hI I on the other 
hand, it was significantly stronger for the inexperienced subjects in NJ-2 
than for the subjects in NJ-l. 
When unaUected by lexical familiarity, the experienced subjects 
in NJ-l Identified IJ/ tokens correctly at native-like rates. In minimal 
pairs consisting of equally familiar words, the correct Identification 
rates for /J/ and II/ averaged 96% and 81% for the subjects In NJ-l, 
and 87% and 53% correct for the subjects in NJ-2. lexical familiarity 
effects disappeared in a second experiment in which word-initial liquids 
were edited out of their original word contexts. When the data for one 
subject who reversed labels were excluded, the correct identification 
rale of Ihe subjects In NJ-l averaged 98% correct for / J/, but Jusl S3% 

--- Page 27 ---
2581 Flege 
correct for /1/ ,7 The experienced Nj subjects' near-perfect identifica­
tion rate for / J/ is consistent with the hypothesis that they established 
a phonetic category for English / J/. 
In a study by Flege, Takagi, and Mann (1995a), the same Japanese 
subjects produced minimally paired English words beginning with 
/J/ and /1/ in three speaking tasks. Native English listeners later 
attempted to identify the initial consunant in these words as / J/ or 
/1/ and ralEd th~ degree of foreign accent. Liquids spoken by the 
experienced NJ-l subjecfs were identified correctly at the same high 
rales as liquids spoken by NE subjects; whereas, liquids produced by 
the inexperienced NJ-2 subjects were often misidentified. Liquids pro­
duced by the NJ-l subjects were identified as intended, and the /J/ 
and /1/ tokens produced by 10 of the 12 NJ-l subjects received ratings 
similar to those for liquids produced by the NE subjects. Inasmuch as 
the inexperienced NJ-2 subjects identified I JI tokens at somewhat 
higher rates than III tokens in the earlier perception experiment, it 
came as a surprise (H3, H7) that their III and I JI tokens were judged 
to have been produced with equal accuracy, at least insofar as the for­
eign accent ratings ~ere concerned (see also Sheldon and Strange 
1982). 
A great deal of L2 research has examined the production and per­
ception of English voiceless stops. In many languages (e.g., Dutch, 
French, Italian, Portuguese, Italian), Ip t k/ are realized as unaspirated 
stops having short-lag VOT values. When ?dult native speakers of 
such languages learn English, they tend to produce / p t k/ with longer 
VOT values in English than in their l1, but with values that are never­
theless too short for English (e.g., Caramazza et a1. 1973; Williams 1979; 
Aege and Port 1981; Major 1987b; Flegc and Eefting 1987a). According to 
lhe model, category formation for English stops may be blocked by the 
continued perceptual linkage of L1 and L2 sounds (Le., by equivalence 
classification). This limits the accuracy with which English Ip t kl can be 
produced (H5, H7). Learners nevertheless have access at an auditory 
level to cross-language phonetic differences (Flege and Hammond 1982; 
Aege and Munro 1994). When category formation is blocked, the pho­
netic norms of English may be approximated indirectly through a 
restructuring of the properties specified in a phonetic category used to 
process perceptually linked L1 and L2 diaphones. Several studies 
have provided evidence that, in such instances, the production of Ll 
stops begins-Io resemble that of corresponding 1.2 stops (H5, H7). Flege 
(1987b) found that experienced NE speakers of French produced English 
Ip t kl with shorter (French-like) VaT values than did English mono-
'The-higher rate for / JI than II/ probably cannot be attribute-d 10 an overall bias 
In favor of I J/ responses, for NJ subjects identified III correctly more often than I JI in 
word-initial dusters (in a case study by Sheldon and Strange 1982). 

--- Page 28 ---
Second-Language Speech Learning I 259 
linguals. Conversely, experienced native French speakers of English 
produced French Ip t kl with longer (English-like) VaT values than 
did French monolinguals (see also Major 1992; Flege and Eefting 
1987b). 
According to the model, individuals who begin learning English 
as children are more likely than adults to discern the phonetic differ­
ences between /p t k/ in Ll and L2 and establish phonetic categories 
(or English Ip t k/. This leads to the prediction that early learners will 
produce these stops accurately more often than late learners. This pre­
diction was can finned by Aege (1991b) in a study that examined stops 
produced by native Spanish (NS) speakers who learned English as 
adults (late learners) or as children (early learners) . The NS late learn­
ers produced English /p t kl wilh Ihe expected "compromise" VaT 
values; whereas, the early learners produced English stops with the 
same VaT values as did NE subjects. This was interpreted to mean 
that the early learners, unlike the late learners, had established pho­
netic categories for English I p t k/. 
This conclusion is consistent with the results of an imitation study 
by Flege and Eefting (1988). Members of a consonant-vowel (CV) con­
tinuum in which VOT of the initial consonant varied were imitated by 
English monolinguais , Spanish monolinguals. and NS early learners. 
The monolinguals tended to produce stops with VaT values falling 
within the two modal VOT ranges used for slops in their Ll (Spanish: 
lead, shorl-Iag; English: short-lag, long-lag). The NS early learners, on 
the other hand, produced stops with values in all three modal VaT 
ranges. Additional analyses revealed that the subjects covertly classified 
stops before imitating them. Thus, the results suggested that the early 
learners processed stops in the VOT continuum in tenns of three pho­
netic categories : a prevoiced (Spanish or English) /d/ category, a short­
lag (Spanish) 11= I calegory, and a long-lag (English) I~ I calegory. 
Acoustic analysis by Flege. Munro. and MacKay (1995b) identified 
the AOL at which divergences from the phonetic norms of English first 
become apparent in Nt subjects' productions of English stop conso­
nants. Voice-onset time was measured in word-initial English stops 
produced by NI subjects who began learning English between the ages 
of 3 and 21 years. Their production of var in English /p t k/ varied 
inversely with AOL. A subgroup of 24 NI subjects who began learning 
English at an average age of 21 years produced English /p/. /t/ and 
Ik/ with VOT values that were almost exactly intermediate to values 
measured for 24 NE subjects and values reported for Italian /p t k/. 
Native Italian subjects who arrived in Canada at earlier ages produced 
English stops with increasingly longer, and thus. more accurate. VOT 
values. The first Nl subgroups to have produced It I and Ipl with 
significantly shorter VaT values than did the NE subjects consisted of 

--- Page 29 ---
260 I Flege 
individuals with average AOLs of 11 and 17 years, respectively .-
It should be emphasized that the kind of age limit jus, mentipneq 
does not necessarily apply to all individuals within a certain AOL range. 
For example, Flege and Schmidt (1995) recently used the speakin~ r~l~ 
paradigm 01 Miller and Volaitis (1989) to test for category (PrIn.lion , 
Native English and NS late learners rated the members of a, labial fitop 
continuum for goodness . Voice·onsel time ranged from short-lag vahle~ 
to long-lag values exceeding those typical for English Ipl, The ~ame 
VaT values occurred in short-duration syllables , which sim"lated a 
fast speaking rate, and in longer-duration syllables , which simulated a 
slower, rate of speech. As expected , the NE subjects' goodness rilltinga 
increased as stimulus VOT values increased, then decreased as VaT 
increased beyond Viii lues typical for English. Also as expected, the NE 
subjects showed an effect of speaking rate on their goodness ratings. 
They gave higher ratings ttl stops with long-lag VOT values in the 
long-duration stimuli than to stops with the same VOT values in ~hort­
duration syllables. This mat'ched how VOT varies according to speaking 
rate in the production of English. 
According to Miller and Volaitis (1989), the speaking rate effects 
shown by NE subjects demonstrates "internal phonetic category struc­
ture," F1ege and Schmidt (1995) reasoned that unless NS subjects had 
a category for long-lag voiceless stops, they would nat show an English~ 
like speaking rate effect on their goexiness judgments of long·lag stops. 
When the NS subjects were subdivided, into two groups based on 
length of residence in the United States, neither group showed a sig· 
nificant speaking rate effect. However , when lOubdivided according to 
how well they pronoun ced English sentences. proficient but not non­
proficient NS subjects showed a significant speaking rate effect. This 
suggested that some of the late learners may have established a phonetic 
category for the long-lag /p/ of English. Schmidt and Flege (1995) 
examined the NS subjects' production of English /p/ at relatively slow 
and fast speaking rates. Roughly one-half of the proficient NS subjects 
produced /p/ with VOT values that were comparable to those observed 
for NE subjects. When speaking, these subjects adjusted VaT as a 
functio~ of speaking rate (i.e., produced /p/ with longer VaT values 
at a slow than fast rale). 
PRODUCTION AND PERCEPTION Of WORD-fINAL CONSONANTS 
Acco.rding 10 HI, position-sensitive allophones in the L2 and Ll are 
related perceptually to one another. This leads 10 the prediction that 
rrhe VOT for Italian /k/ falls within the long-Ii'S ri'nge. None of the 10 Nt sub­
groups differed significantly from the NE subjects for /k/, apparently because the VOT 
difference between English and 1talian /k/ is too small to permit the measurement of 
ttOS6-language interference . 

--- Page 30 ---
Second-l.anguage Speech l.earning 1261 
speakers of an LI without word-final stops will not relate English 
word-final stops perceptually to word-medial or word-initial stops in 
their L1. If so, then we might expect them to eventually produce 
word-final stops in English accurately . This is because, if HI is correct, 
L1 phonetic structures should not interfere with the establishment of 
new phonetic categories. 
Contrary to HI (and H1), inexperienced late learners of English 
have been shown to delete final stops, to devoice Ib d g/, or to add an 
epenthetic vowel to eve words (e.g., Eckman 1981; F1ege 1988a, 1989; 
Ftege and Davidian 1984; Weinberger 1987). Flege, Munro, and 
Skelton (1992) examined the production of Hnal stops in English 
words such as bent and bend by groups of native Mandarin (NM) and 
native Spanish (NS) late learners differing in length of residence in the 
United States (NM-1 = 6 years, NM-2 = 1 year, N5-1 = 9 years, N5-2 = 2 
years). Neither Mandarin nor Spanish permits word-final stops. Word­
final stops produced by the NE subjects were almost always identified 
correctly by native English-speaking listeners. Stops produced by the 
non-native subjects were identified far Jess often (NM-1 = 62%, NM-2 
= 65%, NS-l = 73%, NS-2 = 71%). Surprisingly, the experienced non­
native subjects' stops were identified correctly no more often than 
were stops spoken by the relatively inexperienced non-native speakers 
of English. 
Flege, Munro, and Skelton (1992) carried out acoustic analyses to 
determine why the non-natives' production of both It I and Idl were 
often misidentified . As with the NE speakers, the non-natives sustained 
closure significantly longer in Idl than It I ,made vowels significantly 
longer before Idl than It I , and produced Significantly lower Fl fre­
quencies at the end of transitions leading into Idl than It I . However, 
the non-natives' acoustic distinctions were smaller than those of the 
NE speakers. The subjects in NM-l, NM-2, and NS-1 produced signifi­
cantly smaller closure voicing differences between It I and Idl than 
did the NE subjects, but the closure voicing difference produced by 
the experienced NS subjects did not differ significantly from the NE 
subjects', This suggests that clOSUTt voicing may be learned more readily 
than other cues 10 the It/-/dl distinction (see Kluender et a1. 1988), 
but that a native-like production of closure voicing does not ensure 
correct identification by NE listeners. 
Aege et a!. (1995b) examtned the production of word-final English 
stops by 240 NI subjects who had spoken English for over 30 years on 
average. The results of this study ruled out the possibility that the native 
Mandarin and Spanish subjects' stop production errors (Flege Munro, 
and Skelton 1992) were caused by a lack of sufficient native-speaker 
input. The NI subjects, who began learning English between the ages 
of 3 and 21 years, produced English Ip t kl accurately. Those who 

--- Page 31 ---
2621 Flege 
began learning English by the age of 15 years also produced Ib d gl 
accurately. However , roughly 40% of NI subjects with an AOL of 15 to 
21 years de""iced Ib d g/. 
Table III presents acoustic measurements of tack and tag tokens that 
were spoken by 24 NE subjects and 4B NI subjects with AOLs ranging 
from 12 to 21 years. Productions of Ikl and Igl by the 24 subjects in 
NI·l were identified correctly in every instance. Stops produced by 
the 24 subjects in NI-2 {matched in AOL to the NI-l subjects> were 
identified correctly in only 64% of instances. The acoustic measurements 
make i~ apparent why this was so. The NI-2 subjects (unlike the NI-l 
subjects> produced a significantly smaller vowel duration difference pre­
ceding Igl versus Ikl than did the NE subjects, and a significantly 
smaller closure voicing difference (p < .01). llowever , they produced a 
somewhat larger stop closure difference between Ikl and lSI than 
did the NE subjects. Interestingly, the NI-1 sub~ects produced a signif­
icantly larger closure voicing contrast between /kl and Igl than did 
the NE subjects (p < .01 >. 
It is not clear why the'NI-1 but not NI-2 subjects managed to pro­
duce a perceptually effective contrast between Ikl and Ig/, which 
the model predicts for till highly experh::nced Italian learners of English. 
If certain NI learners of English treat word-final English stops as if 
they were word-medial Italian stops (contrary to HI), we would expect 
NI spea,kers to produce larger closure voicing differences between 
English Ikl and Igi than NE speakers and to produce a larger stop 
closure duration difference. We would 1Iot expect an English-like 
vowel duration difference , however (Mack 1982; Vagges et al. 1978: 
Magno Caldognetto et al. 1979; see also Crowther 1993). If, on the 
olher hand, NT subjects trealed the word-final stops in English eve 
words as "new," we might have expected a thoroughly English-like 
Ikl versus IgI contrast, which was not observed for either the NI-1 
or NI-2 subjects. Perhaps some Nt subjects tend to rely on acoustic 
cues exploited in HaHan more than others, and the use of L1 cues does 
not apply across the board to all relevant phonetic dimensions . This 
could explain the overuse of closure vuicing and closure duration cues 
by certain subjects, and the underuse of vowel duration cues by other 
subjects (see also Flege 1989; Crowther 1993; Flege and Wang 1990). 
THEORETICAL ISSUES 
According 10 the contrastive analysis approach, the presence of 
phone'me s in an L2 that do not occur in the L1 necessarily represents a 
learning problem (e,g., Lado 1957; Moulton 1962; Koutsoudas and 
Koutsoudas 1983). The learner's response may be to use the closest L1 
phoneme as a "substitute" for the unfamiliar l2 phoneme (Lehiste 1988). 

--- Page 32 ---
Second-Language Speech Learning I 26~ 
Table III. Temporal acoustic measurements of tack and tag as spoken by native 
English (NE) speakers and two groups of native Italian (NI) speakers who began 
learning English after the age of 12 years' 
Subject group 
Variable NE NI-l NI-2 
Number of subjects 24 24 24 
Age at arrival in Canada 0(0) 18(2) 18 (3) 
% correct identification of /k gI 97 (7) 100 10) 64(10) 
Vowel duration-lag 246(48) 226(46) 210(53) 
Vowel duration-lack 191(33) 170(38) 196(53) 
Difference: 55 56 I. 
Stop closure duration-tack 102(28) 129(29) 149(44) 
Slap closure duration-tag 75(24) 100(19) 113(33) 
Difference; 27 29 36 
Closure voicing duration-t,1S 51(22) 77(26) 41(28) 
Closure voicing duration-tack 6(13) 13(13) 16(19) 
Difference: 43 64 23 ----
'The Italian subjects in NI-l produced final stops that were alWAYS idenlifled correctly . 
The slops produced by subjects in Nt-2, who were matched according 10 AOL 10 the Nt-l 
subjects, were ohen misidentified by NE listeners. Values for the acoustic variables are in 
ms; standard deviations are in parentheses (data are from Flege, Munro, and MacKay 1995bl_ 
An ll-for-L2 substitution implies that an L2 phoneme (or position­
sensitive allophone) has been perceptually linked to a particular L1 
phoneme (allophone) on some basis. It implies, further, that the learner 
has either failed to discern the phonetic difference between the 11 and 
L2 phonemes or allophones, is unable motorically to render a correctly 
perceived difference , or both. 
First-language -for-second -Ianguage substitutions raise a number 
of theoretically important questions. According to some (e.g., Rachet 
this volume) , most or all L2 sounds will be identified with an L1 
sound. However , some analysts draw a distinction between L2 sounds 
that are relalively similar to sounds in the ll, as opposed to L2 sounds 
that are more dissimilar or even "new" (see Mueller and Niedzielski 
1963; Pimsleur 1963; Bri~re 1966; Henning 1966; Delattre 1964, 1969; 
Flege 1981; Wade 1978). According to the SLM, the full range of L2 
sounds may at first be identified in terms of a positionally defined 
allophone of the II but, as L2 learners gain experience in the L2, they 
may gradually discern the phonetic difference between certain L2 
sounds and the closest Ll sound(s) . When this happens, a phonetic 
category representation may be established for the new U sound that 
is independent of representations established previously for Ll 
sounds. 

--- Page 33 ---
264 f Flege . 
According to the model, the phonetic category established in 
childhood for an L1 sound may evolve gradually if it is linked percep­
tually to an L2 sound. For example, a French speaker's representation 
for word·initial /t/ may evolve to specHy somewhat longer VOT val· 
ues if English /t/ tokens are persistently identified as rea1izations of 
the French /t/ category. This might explain why highly experienced 
French learners of English tend to produce English /t/ with "compro· 
mise" VOT values and why their productions of /t/ in French may 
take on English phonetic characteristics (see above). According to the 
SLM, these developments are influenced by two important variables: 
AOL and perceived cross-language pholletic distance. The greater the 
perceived distance of an L2 sOllnd from the closest L1 sound, the marc 
likely it i!. that a separate category will be established for the L2 
sound. Moreover, the earlier 1.2 learning commences, the smaller the 
perceived phonetic distance needed to trigger the process of category 
formation. 
An obstacle to testing hypotheses Stich as these is the lack of an 
objective means for gauging degree of perceived cross-language pho­
netic distance. It is uncertain, also, what metric bilinguals use in doing 
so. Cross-language phonetic distance might be assessed in terms of the 
sensory (auditory, visual) properties associated with Ll and L2 sounds. 
However, Ladefoged (1990) concluded that although trained phoneti­
cians may be able to agree as to whether or not sounds in two languages 
are "the same," their judgments may have no "principled basis:' and 
their thresholds are "unknown ." Another possibility is that cross­
language distance is gauged in terms of differences in perceived ges­
tures (Browman and Goldstein 1990). Dest (this volume) suggested 
Ihal L1 versus L2 distances can be gaug~d by the "spatial proximity of 
constriction locations and active articulators" and by "similarities in 
constriction degree and gestural phasing." Although appealing, this 
metric may also be difficult to apply. James (1984) suggested that three 
lliffcrent n:'etrics (gestural, acoustic phonetic, abstract phonological) 
may be applied depending on syllabic position. His observation was 
motivated, in part, by the observation that native Dutch learners of 
English use Dutch /d/ for English In/ in word-initial position; 
whereas, they replace /0/ with an alveolar fricative in word-final 
position~ 
The research reviewed in this chapter demonstrated that AOL 
exerls a powerful influence on the production of L2 sounds. (Similar 
tests of the eff~t of AOL on perception have yet to be undertaken, but 
see Oyama, 1978 and Yamada this volume.) Some studies provided 
evidence that L2 sounds not found in the Ll inventory may be pro­
duced more accurately than are L2 sounds with a counterpart in the 
Ll inventory. If we assume that the noninventory sounds are treated 

--- Page 34 ---
Second-Language Speech Learning J 265 
as "new"; whereas, the within-inventory sounds are treated as "simi­
lar," this might be taken as support for a new versus similar distinc­
tion (Flege 1988b). However, research reviewed in the chapter provided 
evidence that non inventory sounds may in some instances be pro­
duced inaccurately, even by highly experienced L2 learners. 
It may be that, in certain instances, the positionally defined allo­
phone is too coarse a unit of analysis to provide accurate predictions 
concerning L2 sound production . 'Trubetzkoy (1939) compared the 
mature L 1 phonological system to a sieve. According to this conceptu­
alization , the Ll phonology passes only that information ahout L2 
sounds that is relevant to L1 phonemic contrasts (see also Koutsoudas 
and Koutsoudas 1983). Weinreich (1953, 1957) noted that feature mis­
matches between the L 1 and U sounds may lead to Dverdirrerentiation, 
reinterpretation , or underdifferentiation of feature contrasts (see also 
Lehiste 1988). The first two kinds of errors may not lead to detectable 
production errors, but the last kind of error may result in a sound sub­
stitution. For example , if NS speakers of English treat the (-continuant) 
feature of English word-initial /d/ tokens as a redundant feature (as 
it is in Spanish) rather than as a distinctive feature (as it is in English), 
they would not be expected to render word-initial /d/ tokens as stops, 
but as fricatives (Weinreich 1957). 
Linguistically trained analysts tend to focus on "distinctive" fea­
tures. Mismatches between L1 and L2 sounds may also be described 
in terms of differences in the acoustic cues used to contrast phones. 
So, for example , we might interpret the replacement of English word­
initial/O/ by /d/ as arising from lack of aUention to, or inappropriate 
weighting of, the amplitude , frequency, and temporal differences 
between word-initial tokens of English /0/ and /d/ (Morosan and 
Jamieson 1989i Crowther and Mann 1992; Crowther 1993). Some part 
or all of what is referred to as language's "phonological filter" may 
consist of learned aspects of perceptual processing that are an out­
growth of "interpretative schemes" established in early childhood for 
word recognition (Jusczyk 1992). Such schemes are thought to focus 
attention automatically on auditory patterns important to meaning 
distinctions in the L1 and may become more abstract as children 
develop larger lexicons. Jusczyk (1985) suggested, for example, that 
allophoni c variants may not be grouped into a single phonemic cate­
gory by children until the age of 5 or 6 years, when they begin learning 
to read. 
Alternatively , the feature differences between languages could be 
stated in terms of the "contrastive gestures" used to signal meaning 
differences (Brow man and Goldstein 1990). According to Best's direct 
realist account (this volume), perceivers have direct access through 
their senses to the elemental gestures used to fonn speech sounds. 

--- Page 35 ---
266/ F/ege • 
During speech development, children Jearn to pick up information 
in speech more quickly and efficiently by virtue of learning what are 
the "critical" aspects of gestures llSed in the L 1. This leads to the estab­
lishment of "lower-order invariants," which are generally relational 
• in nature and which permit perceptual constancy in the face of acoustic 
variation. As the phonological system matures, the lower-order 
invariants may give way to higher-order, language-specific invariants 
that reduce the amount of lower-order phonetic detail that is detected 
(Best 1994). 
One possible explanation for the ubiquitolls age effects on L2 pro­
duction discussed earlier in this chapter is that early learners of an L2 
art.! morc likely to "pick up" detailed information concerning the spec­
ification of L2 sounds than arc individuals who begin learning an L2 
later in life. Early learners may perceive L2 sounds in terms of "Iower­
order" rather than "higher-order" invariants. Changes in the level of 
auditory-acoustic analysis might also be impOilant. Koutsoudas and 
Koutsoudas (983) suggested that inlerlingual identification occurs at 
a phonemic level and is based on the articulatory phonetic "common 
denominator" of all allophones of a phoneme. Perhaps this statement 
is more true {or individuals who begin learning the L2 after about the 
age of 10 years than it is for those who begin learning their L2 earlier 
in life. 
Regardless of how the feature differences between L 1 and L2 
sounds are stated, it seems that non-natives often do not perceive L2 
sounds in exactly the same way monolingual native speakers of the 
target L2 do. As noted earlier, they may fail to discern the phonetic 
differences between contrastive phones in the L2, or between L1 and 
L2 phones. Discriminative failures in L2 acquisition usually do not 
have an auditory basis. For example, Miyawaki et al. (197S) found that 
Japanese listeners who were unable to discriminate / JO/ and /10/ syl­
lables were, nonetheless, able to discriminate isolated third formants 
taken from those syllables. Werker and Tees (1984) found that NE sub­
jects could discriminate short portions extracted from a foreign lan­
guage contTast (Hindi dental vs. retroflex stops), but not the original 
CV syllables (rom which those portions had been edited. Mann (1986) 
noted an effect of preceding context (/ JI versus II!) on Id/-/gl 
phoneme boundaries for native Japanese subjects who could not differ­
entially identify I JI versus /1/ that was much the same as the effect 
noted for NE subjects. Finally. Best et al. (1966) observed surprisingly 
good discrimination of Zulu clicks by NE adults, apparently because 
the clicks wer~ not identified as speech sounds. 
What kind of features are used by L2 learners as they begin to 
analyze the phonic elements of their L2? What kind do they use once 
they have gained a thorough familiarity with the L2 sound system? 

--- Page 36 ---
Second·LanguaBt Speech Learning I 267 
Answers to these questions are not yet possible, but several points can 
be made with some certainty. First, the features used to distinguish Ll 
sounds can probably not be freely recombined to produce new L2 
sounds. F1ege and Port (]981) examined native A.rabic (NA) subjects 
who began learning English in adulthood, and had lived for several 
years in the United States. Arabic has the stop consonants Ib t d k/, 
but no Ipl or Ig/. Many of the NA subjects' English Ipl productions 
were heard as fbi because they were produced with closure voicing 
(as are the Ibl and I dl of Arabic). However , the NA subjects produced 
much the same temporal contrast between English Ipl and Ibl as they 
produced between It I and Id/. This suggested that they had recog­
nized the phonological nature of the English /p/ versus /b/ contrast, 
but did not transfer the voiceless feature of their Itt and /kl to Ip/. 
Some production difficulties may arise because features used in 
the L2 are not used in the Ll. In a recent multidimensional scaling 
(MDS) analysis, Fox, Flege, and Munro (1995) found that NE subjects 
used three dimensions in perceiving naturally produced vowels; 
whereas, NS subjects used just two, probably because Spanish has far 
fewer vowels than English. As mentioned earlier, Munro et a1. (1995) 
found that NI subjects who began learning English after about the age 
of 10 years produced English 1.".1 inaccurately. These NI subjects may 
have been unable to acquire sensitivity to the retroflex feature that NE 
listeners use to distinguish English /..,.1 from all other English vowels 
(Terbeek 1977). Beyond a certain AOL, L2 learners may rely on features 
used in the Ll to interpret and represent sounds encountered. in the 
12, even those 12 sounds that are treated as "new" (i.e., as falling out­
side the Ll phonetic inventory). For example, neither Swedish nor 
Finnish has an /s/-/z/ contrast in final position. Flege and 
Hillenbrand (1986) found that Swedes and Finns used different 
acoustic cues (vowel duration, but not fricative duration) than did NE 
subjects (who used both) to identify final consonants in a pence-peas 
continuum . Work by Gottfried and Beddor (1988) and Munro (1992) 
suggested that the overall use made of duration in the Ll may influence 
the extent to which L2 learners exploit temporal cues to a novel L2 
contrast. 
The phenomenon of "differential substitution" shows that we need 
recourse to more than just a simple listing of features used in the Ll and 
L.2 to explain certain L2 production errors. For example, although both 
Russian and Japan~e have /5/ and /t/, Russians tend to substitute 
It I for English /81, whereas Japanese learners use /s/. Weinberger 
(1990) presented evidence that feature counting, feature weighting, 
and universal marking conventions cannot account for differential 
substitution patterns. Radical underspedfi cation theory (which treats 
features, not segments, as primitives) on the other hand, may do so 

--- Page 37 ---
2681 Flege 
given certain assumptions about the underlying feature matrix, re­
dundancy rules, and feature pruning. 
Certain features may enjoy an advantage over others because of 
the'nature of their acoustic (or gestural) specification, or their reliability 
of occurrence. Polka (1991) found that Hindi dental versus retroflex 
place distinctions may be discriminated more accurately by native 
speakers Of English in voiceless unaspirated stops than in prevoiced 
stops. This appeared to be the case because the place distinction is 
supported by grealer formant transition differences in the former than 
the latter stops. Flege and Hillenbrand (1987) obtained data suggesting 
that native French speakers make greater use of release burst infor­
mation in judging the VOicing feature in word-final stops than do NE 
spealfers, apparently because final stops are released consistently by 
speakers of French but not English. 
Finally, features may be evaluated differently as a function of 
position in the syllable. Urowman and Goldstein (1990) suggested that, 
in English, vowel gestures are coordinated (phased) with respect to 
the gestures used for a preceding consonant, and final consonant ges­
tures are "phased with respect to preceding vocalic gestures." Samuel, 
Kat. and Tartter (1984) provided evidence that initial. medial, and 
final consonants are processed differently by NE listeners. Languages 
differ considerably in the range of permitted syllables , which leads to 
differences in syllable-processing strategit:5 (Cutler et al. 1983, 1986; 
F1ege 1989; F1ege and Wang 1990). Not unexpectedly, then, studies have 
shown that the perceptual difficulty of a novel L2 phonemic contrast 
may vary accordIng to syllable position (e.g., Sheldon and Strange 
1982; James 1988; Weiden 1990; Pisani and Lively this volume) . For 
example, Major (1986) found that NE subjects' accuracy in producing 
Spanish / r I varied considerably as a function of position in the syl­
lable. Morosan and Jamieson (1989) found that effects of perceptual 
training on word-initial allophones did not transfer completely to 
medial or final positions , which suggested to them that listeners may 
learn "syllabically ." 
Given the ubiquity of foreign accents in L2 production, an impor­
tant general questio,n for future research is how, or it the perception 
of L2 sounds changes as AOL increases. Hammarb erg (1988, 1990) 
suggested that phonetic -level comparisons oj L1 and L2 sounds may 
be more prevalent in early than later stages of L2 learning. Another 
important . question is huw, and to what extent, an individual's per­
ception changes during L2 learning. Flege (1991c) found that as NS 
subjects gained familiarity with English, they became less likely to 
identify English /II tokens as exemplars of their Spanish Iii category. 
Thus, L2 learners may discover that certain sounds in an L2 are not 
"the same" phonetically as sounds they already know from the Ll. The 

--- Page 38 ---
Second-Language Speech Learning I 269 
observation that "schooled" native French (NF) speakers of French 
substitute /s/ for English /8/, whereas "unschooled" NF subjects sub­
stitute /t/ suggests that the metric used to gauge cross-language dis­
tance might also change as a function of L2 experience or proficiency 
(Berger 1951; see also Wenk 1979). If the perception of U sounds does 
change, we need to know haw it changes, and what impact perceptual 
changes have on L2 speech production . These, and many other ques­
tions, must be resolved in order to understand fully the contribution 
of perception to foreign accented ness. 
REfERENCES 
Berger, M. 1951. The American English pronunciation of Russian immigrants . 
Ph.D. dissertation , Columbia University , New York. 
Best, C. 1993. Emergen ce of language-specific constraints in perception of non­
native speech; A window on early phonological development. In Develop­
melltat Neurocog'lition ,' SptecJl and Fact Processjng j" tIle First Year of Life, ed. B. 
de Boysson-Bardies , S. de Schonen, P. }usczyk, P. MacNeilage, and }. Mor­
Ion. Dordrecht, the Netherlands : Kiuwer Academic Publishers. 
Best, c., McRoberts, G., and Sithole, N. 1988. The phonological basis of per­
ceptualloss for non-native contrasts: Maintenance of discrimination among 
Zulu clicks by English-speaking adults and infants. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Human Peraption and Performance 14:345-60. 
Bahn, 0.-5., and Flege, J. E. 1990.lnterlingual identification and the role of for­
eign language experience in L2 vowel perception . Applied Psycholinguislics 
]]:303-28. 
Bahn, 0.-5., and Flege,}. E. 1992. The production of new and similar vowels 
by adult German learners of English. Studies in Second lAnguage Acquisition 
14:131-58. 
Brennan. E .• Ryan. E .• and Dawson, W. 1975. Scaling of apparent accented ness 
by magnitude estimation and sensory modality matching . 1014"lal of 
Psycllolingui stic Researcll 4:27-36. 
Bri~re , E. 1966. An investigation of phonological interference . tnngl/Qse 
42:769-96. 
8rowman , c., and Goldstein, L. 1990. Gestural specification using dynamically ~ 
defined articulatory structures .lol/fllal of Phonetics 18:299-320. 
Butcher, A. 1976. The influence of the native language on the perception of 
vowel quality. M.Phil. thesis, Kiel University . 
Caramazza, A., Yeni-Komshlan, G., Zurif, E., and Carbone, E. 1973. The acqui­
sition of a new phonological contrast: The case of stop consonants in French­
English bilinguals . lOUr/lid of the AcoJlslical Society of AmeriOl 54:421-28 . 
Cochrane, R. 1977. The acquisition of Irl and III by Japanese children and 
adults Learning English as a second language. Unpublished Ph.D. disserta­
tion, University of Connecticut. 
Crowther, C. 1993. The Operation of Vocalic Duration and F1 Offset 
Frequen cy as Voicing and Vowel Cues. Ph.D. dissertation, University of 
California-Irvine. 
Crowther, c., and Mann, V. 1992. Native language factors affecting use of 
vocalic cues to final consonant voiting in English. Journal of the Acoustical 
Socidy of America 92:711-22. 

--- Page 39 ---
210 I Flege 
Crystal, T., and House, A. 1988. TIle duration of American-English vowels: An 
overview . /o"",a/ of Phonetics 16:263-84 . 
Cutler, A., Mehler, L Norris, D., and Segui. J. 1983. A language specific com­
prehension strategy. Nature 304:159-60. 
Cutler, A" Mehler, L Norris, D., and Segui, J. 1986. The syllable's differing 
role in the segmentation of French and English. lounwl of Memory and 
LlIIgl/age 25:385--400. 
Delattre, P. 1964. Comparing the vocalic features of English, German, Spanish. 
and French.lIltemaliolla/ Reviewal Appfh'd Lillguistics 2:71-97 
Delattre, P. 1969. An acoustic and articulatory study of vowel reduction in 
four ianguages .llllemntiolial Review of Applied Lingllistics 7:295-323. 
Eckman, F. 1981. On the naturalness of interlanguage phonological rules. 
li/ngllnge Lt'llrll;IIg 31:195-216. 
Eilers, I~., Wilson, W. and Moore, J. 1977. Developmental changes in speech 
discrimination in infants. Joufl/n/ of Spee{'/, and Hearing Resenrd, 20:766-80. 
Fay~r . Land Krasinksi , E. 1987. Native and non-native judgments of intelligi­
bilily and irritation . Language Learning 37:313-26. 
Ferrero. F .. Mchelolli. E., Pelamatti. C .. and V3gges, K. 1978. Some acoustic 
cll<~ra cterislics of Italian vowels. Joumalof Ilaliall Linguistics 3:87-95. 
Ferrero, F., Michelotti , E., Peiamatti , C .. Umilita. c., and Vagges, K. 1979. 
Auditory and phonetic processing of Italian voiceless fricatives shortened in 
duration . lIalian JOllrnal of Psychology 6:237--49. 
Flege, J. E. 1981. The phonological basis of foreign accent. TESOL Quarterly 
15,44:>-55. 
Aege, J. E. 1987a. A critical period for learning to pronounce foreign languages? 
Applied Lingll;stic s 8:'162-77. 
Fiege, J. E. 1987b. The production of "new" and "similar" phones in a foreign 
language : Evidence for the effect of el)uivalen c~ classification . JOllrnal of 
PllDlletics 15:47-65. 
Fiege, J. E. 1938a. The developm~nt of skill in prodUCing word-final English 
stops: Kinematic parameters . JOllmal of tile Aco:4stical Sodety of America 
84,1639-52. 
Flege, J. E. 1988b. The production and perception of foreign language speech 
sounds. In Hllmau Commulli cation alld lis Disorders , A RevielQ-1988 , ed. H. 
WinHz. Norwood , NI: Ablex. 
Flege, J. E. 1989. Chinese subjects ' perception of the word-final English 
It/-/dl contrast : Performance bdon' and after training. Joumal ol/he 
Acoustkal Society of Aml!ricu 86:1684-97. 
Flege, J. E. 1991a. Perception and production: The relevance of phonetic input 
to.L2 phonological learning. In Crosscurrents in Second uwguage Acquisilioll 
alld Linguisti c Theory. ed. T. Heubner, and C. Ferguson. Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 
Rege. J. E. 1991b. Age oC learning aHects the authenticily of voice onset time 
(VOT) In stop consonants produced in a second language . Journal of Ill, 
Acoustical Society of America 89:395--411 . 
Flege, J. E. 1991c. Orthographic evidence for the perceptual identlHcaUon of 
vowels in Spanish and English. Quarterly JOUr/wi 01 Experimental Psychology 
43:701-31. 
Flege, J. E. 1992a. Speech learning in a second language . In Phonological 
Development : Models. Research. (llId Application, ed. C. Ferguson , L. Menn, and 
C. Stoel-Cammon. Timonium, MD: York Press. 
Flege, }. E. 1992b. The intemgibility of English vowels spoken by British and 

--- Page 40 ---
Second-Language Speech Learning 1271 
Dulch talkers. In llltflligibility ill Speec" Disorders, ed. R. Kent. Amsterdam: 
john Benjamins. 
Flege, J. E. 1993. Production and perception of a novel, second-language pho­
netic contrast. Journal of ti,e Acollstical Society of America 93:1589-1608. 
Flege, J. E. 1995. Oddity discrimination of English vowels by non-natives. Ms. 
in preparation. Department of Biocommunication, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham . 
Flege, J. E., and Bohn, 0.-5. 1989. The perception of English vowels by native 
Spanish speakers. }DllrlJal of 'he Acoustical Society of America 85:S85(A) . 
Flege, J. E., and Davidian , D. 1984. Transfer and developmental processes in 
adult foreign language speech production. Applied PSycilOlil1guistics 
5323-47. 
Flege, J. E., and Eelling, W. 1986. Linguistic and developmental effects on the 
production and perception of slop consonants. PhOllfticn 43:155-71. 
F1ege, J. E., and Eefting. W. 1987a. The production and perception of English 
slaps by Spanish speakers of English./ollrIJlIl of P/lOlltlics 15:67-83. 
Flege, J. E., and Eefting, W. 1987b. Cross-language switching in stop conso­
nant production and perception by Dulch speakers of English. Spudl 
COlllllllluiclltillf1 6: 185-:-202. 
Flege, J. E., and Eefting, W. 1988. Imitation of a VOT continuum by native 
speakers of English and Spanish: Evidence for phonetic category formation. 
/ollrual of 'he Acousticnl Socie'y of Americn 83:n9-40. 
Flege, J. E" and Hammond, R. 1982. Mimicry of non..<fistinctive phonetic dif­
ferences between language varieties. Stud its in Second umgllQge Acquisition 
5:1-18. 
Aege, j. E., and Hillenbrand, J. 1986. Dil£erential use of temporal cues to the 
/S/-/2/ contrast by native and non-native speakers of English. }ollrJIal of the 
Acoustical Society of America 79:508-17. 
Rege, J. E .• and Hillenbrand, J. 1987. Differential use of closure voicing and 
release burst as cue to stop voicing by native speakers of French and English. 
}ollrJIai of Phone,jcs 15:203-8. 
Rege, J. E., and Munro, M. 1994. The word unit in L2 speech production and 
perception . Studies ill Suond Lnngllage Acquisitiotl16:381-411. 
Flege, J. E., Munro, M., and Fox, R. 1994. Auditory and categorical effects on 
cross-language vowel perception . JOllrJIa/ of ti,e Acol/slicnl SOCiety of AmericII 
95:3623-41 . 
Flege,1. E .• Munro, M., and MacKay, I. 1995a. Factors affecting degree of per­
ceived foreign accent in a second language. /ourllal of tile Acolistical Soddy of 
America 97:3125-34. 
Rege, J. E., Munro, M ., and MacKay, I. 1995b. Effects of age of second-language 
learning on the production of English consonants. Speech Communicatiol' 
16:1-26. 
Flege, J. E., Munro. M ., and MacKay. I. t995c. Factors affecting the production 
of word-initial consonants in a second language . In Variation Unguistics and 
SLA. ed. D. PreSion. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. In press. 
Flege, ]. E., Munro, M., and Skelton, L. 1992. Production of the word-final 
English /t/-/d/ contrast by native speakers of English, Mandarin, and 
Spanish./olln/1I1 of tI,e Acoustical Society of Alllltrica 92:128-43. 
Flege, j. E., and Port, R. 1981. Cross-language phonetic interference : Arabic to 
English. umgl4age and Speech 24:125-46 . 
Flege, J. E., and Schmidt, A. 1995. Native speakers of Spanish show rale­
dependent processing of English stop consonants. PhonttiCA 52:90-111. , ; 

--- Page 41 ---
2721Flese 
Aege, J. E., and Takagi, N. 1994, Speaking task effects on Japanese speakers' 
production of English / J/ and /1/, Lnllgllage and SpeeclJ. Under review. 
Rege, J. E., Takagi, N., and Mann, V. 1995a. Japanese adults can learn to pro­
duce /J/ and III accurately. umglla>!t' a1ld Speech 38, Part L In press. 
Rege, J. E., Takagi, N., and Mann, V. 1995b. Experienced Japanese speakers of 
English can identify English I JI accurately, but not III. /ollrual of the Acolls­
tical Society of America. Under review. 
Aege, j. E., and Wang, C. 1990, Native-language phonotactic constraints arlect 
how well Chinese subjects perceive the word-final English It/-/dl conlrast. 
/ollmal of Phollelics 17:299-315 . 
Fox. R. A.. Flege. J. E., and Munro. M. J. 1994, A multidimensional scaling 
analysis of Spanish and English vowels. }ol/nlal of lI.e Acoustical Suc;i!ly uf 
America 97:2540--51. 
Giles, H. 1970, Evaluation.11 reactions 10 accents. £'/Ilcatilllml ReViall 22:211-27. 
Goldstein , L., and Browltlan, C. 1986. Representation of voicing conLrasts 
using articulatory gestures. /ollmal of Phonetics !4:339-42. 
Gottfried, T. 1983. Effects of consonant context on the perception of French 
vowcls.Joun.t:l1 of PllOtlelics 12:91-114. 
Gottfried. T., and Beddor. P. 1988. Perception of temporal and spectral infor­
mation in French voweb. LJwguage alii' Speedt 3157-75. 
Greene. U., Pisoni. D" and Gradman. II. 1985. Perception of synthetic speech 
by non-native sgeakers of English. I<eseard, all Speedt Perceptioll 11:419-28 
(Department of Psychology , Indiana University). 
Grosjean, F. 1989. Neurolinguists. beware! The bilingual is not two monolin­
guals in one person. Brail/ alld umgllage 36:3-15. 
Gumperz. j. 1982. Discourse Strategies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Haggard, M., Corrigall, j., and Legg, A. 1971. Perceptual factors in articulatory 
defects. Folia Phoniatrica 23:33-40. 
Hammarberg, B, 1988. Studielf zl/r PllOl/o/ogie des Zweits/lfachhelltTWerbs. 
Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell. 
Hammarberg , B. 1990. Conditions on transfer in second language phonology 
acquisition. In New $ollllds 90, Proceedillgs of /he 1990 Allls/eTllam Symposium 
on the Acquisition of Sectllld-lallgllage Speedl, cd: J. Leather and A. James. 
Amsterdam; University of Amslerdam , 
Henning. W. 1966. Discrimination training and self-evaluation in the tcaching 
of pronunciation. I"ternal iOllal RtvieUl of Applied Lill8uist ics 4:7-17. 
Hill, J, 1970. Foreign accents, language acquisition, and cerebral dominance 
revisite~. Langl/age LeaT/llllg 20:237-4~ . 
Hold~n, K., and Hogan. J. 1993. The emotive impact of foreign intonation: An 
experiment in switching English and Russian intonation , umguage and 
Speech 36:67-88. 
James, A. 1984. Phonetic transfer: The structural bases of interlingual as­
sessments. In Proceedings of the Tellll, IIden/atiOllal Congress of Pllont/ic 
Sciulces. ed. M. van den Broecke, and A. Cohen. Dordrccht. The Neth­
erlands: Foris. 
James, A 1988. The Acquisilioll of Second lAnguage Phollology . Tubingen: Gunter 
Narr. 
Jamieson , D .• and Morosan , D. 1986. Training non-native speech contrasts in 
adults: Acquisition or the English /0/-/8/ contrast by francophones , Per­
ceplion & Psychophysics 40:205--15. 
Jusczyk, P. 1985. On characterizing the development of speech perception . 
Neonate Cognition ; Beyond the Blooming. Buzzitlg Confusion , ed, J, Mehler, and 
R. Fox. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

--- Page 42 ---
t 
J Second·Language Speech Learning I 27 
Jusczyk, P. 1992. Developing phonological categories from the speech signal 
In PhonologiclJl Developmetll : Models, ReseIJrch, and ImpliclJtions, ed. C 
Ferguson , L Menn, and C. Stoel-Gammon . Timonium, MD: York Press. 
Kluender , K., Diehl. R., and Killeen, P. 1987. Japanese quail can learn phoneti, 
categories . Sciener 237:1195-97 . 
Kluender. K .• Diehl, R.. and Wright, 8. 1988. Vowel·tength differences befon 
voiced and voiceless consonants : An auditory explanation . /owrnal o. 
P/'Olletics 16:153-69. 
Koster, C. 1987. Word Recognitioll in Foreign and NIJtiw umgwIJge. Dordrecht 
The Netherlands : Faris. 
Koutsoudas , A., and Koutsoudas. O. 1983. A contrastive analysis of the seg· 
mental phonemes of Greek and English. In Srcotld LA'lgllagr Learning 
Cu"trastivt A'ia/ysis. Error Analysis, fwd Rr/ntrd Aspects, ed. n. Robinett, and 
J. Schachter. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
Ladefoged , P. 1990. Some reflections on the IPA. Jouflln/ of Pllonrtics 18:335--46. 
Lado, R. 1957. Litlguistics across ClIltllres . Ann Arbor: University of Michigall 
Press. 
Lambert, W., Hodgson . R., Gardner, R., and Fillenbaum , S. 1960. Evaluationa ' 
reactions to spoken languages . 10l/fllnl of Abllormal SOcilJ/ Psychology 60:44-51. 
Lamminmiiki , R. 1979. The discrimination and identification of English vowels 
consonants, junctures , and sentence stress by Finnish comprehensive schoo 
pupils. Papt:rs ;', Contrastive Phondics , lyw'skylli Cross·lAngllagr Studie~ 
7:165-231. (Department of English. Jyvaskyli University .) 
Lane, H. 1963. Foreign accent and speech distortion . /ounlal of tile Acowstica l 
Sodrty of Amrrica 35:451-53. 
Lehiste, l. 1988. l1clures On lAnguagr Conlacl. Cambridge , MA: MIT Press. 
Lenneberg , E. 1967. BiologiCQI FoulidatiOfls of Lang~agr. New York: Wiley. 
Liljencrants , J., and Lindblom , B. 1972. Numerical simulation 01 vowel quality 
systems: TIle role of perceptual contrast. umgullge 48:83~2. 
Lindblom , 8. 1990a. On the notion of "possible speech sound." /ollrnal of Pho­
ndics 18:135-52. 
Lindblom , n. 1990b. Explaining phonetic variation : A sketch of the Hand H 
theory. In Sperclt Production alld S,Jeedl Madding. ed. W. Hardcastle, and A. 
Marchal. Amsterdam: Kluwer. 
Llnell. P. 1982. The concept of phonological form and the activities of speech 
production and speech perception . /ollnul/ of Pllonrtics 10:37-72. 
Locke J. 1980. The inference of speech perception in the phonOlogically disor· 
dered child. Part II: Some clinically novel procedures, their use, some finding. 
Jounml of Sperch and Hellrillg Disordt:rs 45:445-68. 
Logan. L Lively. S., and Pisoni, D. 1991. Training Japanese listeners to identify 
/rl and III: A first report. Jourt/al of the .... coustical Society 0/ Amrrica 
89,874-86. 
Long. M. 1990. Maturational constraints on language development. St~dies in 
~'olld uwgllage ACqllisitioll 12:251-85. 
Mack, M. 1982. Voicing-dependent vowel duration in English and French: 
Monolingual and bilingual production . Journal of Ole Acoustical Soddy of 
Amrrica 71:173-78. 
Mack, M. 1988. Sentence processing by non-native speakers of English: Evidence 
from the perception of natural and computer-genera ted anomalous 1..2 sen· 
tences./ollrnal of Neuroling~isli cs 3:293-316. 
Mack, M. 1989. Consonant and vowel perception and production: Early English· 
French bilinguals and English monoUnguals . Perception & Psychophysics 
46,187-200. 

--- Page 43 ---
274 I Flege 
Mack, M. 1990. Phonetic transfer in a French·English bilingual child. In 
Lnllguage Attitudes Dud ulI1guage Collflicl, ed. P. H. Nelde. Bonn, Germany: 
Diimmler. 
Mack M., Tierpey. J.. and Boyle, M. 1990. The iJltelligibility of natural and 
LPC-vocode d words and sentences presented to native and non-native 
speakers of English. MIT Lincoln Laboratory. Technical Report 869 (32 pps). 
Magen, H., and Blumstein, S. 1993. Effects of speaking rate on the vowel 
length distinction in Korean. Journal of PI'Ollelics 21 :387-410. 
Magno Caldognetto , E., Ferrero, F., Vagges K., and Bagno. M. 1979. Indici acusti­
ci e indio percevelti oel riconosdmento dei suoni Iinguistici. Acla Pllo,,;atrica 
LAtina 1:21~6 . 
Major, R., 1986. The ontogeny model: Evidence from L2 acquisition of Spanish 
r.LAnguage Learning 36:453-504. 
Mater, R. 1987a. Phonological similarity. markedness . and rate of U acquisition. 
Studi~s ill S~colld uwglmge Acquisitioll 9:63-82. 
Major, R. 1987b. English voiceless stop production by speakers of Brazilian 
Portuguese .lol/rllIlI of P/lOnelics 15:197-202. 
Major, R. 1992. Losing English as a first language . Ti,e Modeflllnllgllage JOl/mal 
76,190-208. 
Mann, V. 1986. Distinguishing universal and language -dependent levels of 
speech perception: Evidence from Japanese listeners ' perception of English 
"I" and "rN. Cognition 24:169-96. 
Martinet, A. 1955. Eeanomie des Oultlgemellts PJJolliti'1" ts lkme: A. Franke. 
Mayberry , R.. and Eichen, E. 1991. The long-lasting advantage of learning sign 
language in childhood : Another look at the critical period for language 
acqUisition . /ollrnal of Memory and lnll811age 30:486-512. 
McAllister. R. 1990. Perceptual foreign accent: 12 user's comprehension ability. 
In New Sounds 90. Proceeding s of the 1990 Amstudam Symposium Oil IIle 
ACqllisilioli of Second-language Speech. eel. J. Leather, and A. James. Depart­
ment of English, University of Amsterdam. 
Miller, J., and Volaitis, L. 1989. Effect of speaking rate on the perceptual struc­
ture of a phonetic category. Puaptioll & PsycJlOphysics 46:505-12. 
Miyawaki , K., Liberman , A., Jenkins, j., and Fujimura, O. 1975. An effect of 
Iinguislic experience: The discrinlination of Irl and 111 by native speakers of 
Japanese and English. Percep/joll & Psyc/lOpllysics 18:331-40. 
Munnin. L., and Hunlington , D. 1974. Relationship of articulatory defects to 
speech-sound identification./ollrllal of Speech alld Hearing ResearciJ 17:352-66. 
Morosan, D., and JatniEjson , D. 1989. Evaluation of a technique for Iraining 
new speech contrasts: Generalization across voices, bul not word-position 
or lask. Joumal of Speech and Hearing Research 32:501-11. 
Moulton , W. 1945. Diait.oct geography and Ihe conc~!-,I of phonological space. 
Word 18:23-32. 
Moulton , W. ]962. 11le Sol/lids of English alld German. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Pre.s. 
Mueller, T., and Niedzielski,.H. 1963. The influence of discriminatiun training 
on pronuncintion . Modem lAtlgllage lelllmat 52:410-16. 
Mullennix ,1-. I'isoni. D. and Martin. C. 19t19. Some effecls of lalker variability on 
spoken"word recognition . /olfrual of "Ie Aeausliml Sodely of America 85:365-78. 
Munro. M. 191J2. Perception and production of English vowels by native 
speakers of Arabic. Unpublished Ph.D. disserlati on, University of Alberta. 
Munro, M. 1993. Non-native productions of English vowels: Acoustic measure-­
ments and accented ness ratings. Applied Psycllofin811istics 36:39-66 . . , 

--- Page 44 ---
Second-Language Speech Learning I 275 
Munro, M., Flege,]. E., and MacKay, 1.1995. Effects of age of second-language 
learning on the production of English vowels. Applied Psycholingui stics. To 
appear. 
Nabelek, A., and Donahue , A. 1984. Perception of consonants in reverberation 
by native and non-native listeners . ]ouma' of the AcollstiCJII Society of America 
75,632-34. 
Nakauchi, J. 1993. The identification of /1/ and Ir/ by Japanese early, in­
termediate and late bilinguals . Spud •• HeariF!g gnd l..Ilnguage, Work iF! 
Progress 7:155-79 (University College, London, Dept. of Phonetics and Lin­
guistics.) 
Neufeld, G. 1979. Towards a theory of. language learning ability. LAnguage 
J..eami"8 29:227-41. 
Nooleboom, 5., and Truin, P. 1980. Word recognition from fragments of sJX>ken 
words by native and non-native listeners. JPO Arllli/al Progress Report 15:42-47. 
Novoa, L., Fein, D., and Obler, L. 1988. Talent in foreign languages : A case 
study. In Tile fxceptioulIl BT/~i", Neuropsychology of Tale,,' aPld Special Abilities, 
ed. L. Obler, and D. Fein. New York: Guilford Press. 
Oyama, S. 1976. The sensitive period for the acquisition of a non-native 
phonological system. /oumal of Psycllolillguisti c Re5ellrch 5:261-85. 
Oyama, S. 1978. The sensitive period and comprehension of speech. Workillg 
Paptrsotl Bilillgllalism 16:1-17. 
ratkowski , M. 1990. Age and accent in a second language : A reply to James 
Emil Rege. App/itd U,lgu;stics 11:73-89. 
Penfield, W. 1965. Conditioning the uncommitted cortex for language learn­
ing. Brain 88:787-98. 
Peng, S. H. 1993. Cross-language influence on the production of Mandarin If I 
and Ixl and Taiwanese Ihl by native speakers of Taiwanese Amoy_ 
Pllolletica 50:245-60. 
Pimsleur , P. 1963. Discrimination training in the teaching of French pronunci­
ation. ModUli Lallguage ]0Ilnla/47 :199-203. 
Polka, L. 1991. Cross-language speech perception in adults: Phonemic . pho­
netic, and acoustic c<;mtTibutions . /ollmal of tilt Acoustical Society of America 
89,2961-77. 
Powers. M. 1957. Functional disorders of articulation -symptomatology and 
etiology. In Travis Hamlbook of Speech Pathology . New York: Appleton Cen­
tury Crorts. 
Samuel, A., Kat, D .• and Tactter, V. 1984. Which syllable does an intervocalic 
stop be10ng t07 A selective adaptation study. /ol/mlll of the Acol/stical Society 
of America 6:1652-63. 
Schmidt , A. M., and Flege, J. E. 1995. Effects of speaking rate changes on 
native and non-native production . Phollelica 52:41-54. 
Scovel, T. 1988. A Time to Sptnk, A PsycllOlitlgllisti c Illquiry into tlle Critical Period 
for Hllmall Speech. Cambridge, MA: Newbury House. 
Sekiyama , K.. and Tohkura , Y. 1993. Inter-language differences in the innuence 
of visual cues in speech perception . lallmal 0/ Plfolletics 21:427-44 . 
Sheldon, A., and Strange, W. 1982. The acquisition of Irl and III by Japanese 
learners of English: Evidence that speech production can precede speech 
perception. Applied Psycllo/itl8"; StiN 3:243-61. 
Snow, C., and Hoefnagel -H6hle, M. 1979. lndividual differences in second­
language ability: A factor-analytic study. lAllguage and Speech 22:151-62. 
Spriestersba ch, R., and Curtis, J. 1951. Misarticuiation and discrimination of 
speech sounds. QURrt~rly /ournal of Speech 37:483-91. 

--- Page 45 ---
2761Flese . 
Strange, W. 1992. Learning non-native phoneme contrasts: Interactions among 
subject, stimulus, and task variables. in Speech Ptrceptiol1 , Production , rwd 
Linguistic Strllchlre, eel. E. Tohkura, E. Vatikiotis-Bateson, and Y. Sagisaka . 
Tokyo: Ohmsha. 
Sussman,}. 1993. Auditory processing in children's speech perception : Results 
of selective adaptation and discrimination tests. JOIl",al 0/ Speech and Hetlriu8 
Researcn 36:380-95. 
Takagi. N. 1993. Percepti on of American English Irl and III by adult 
Japanese learners of English: A unified view. Unpublished Ph.D dissertation , 
University of California-Irvine. 
Terheek, D. 1977. A cross-language multidimension al scaling study of vowel 
perception . UCLA Working Papers in Pllolletics, 37. _ 
Trubelzkoy, N. 1939/1%9. Principles of PllOllology. Translated by C. A. Baltaxe, 
Berkeley, CA University of California Presto. 
Uchanski, M., Miller, D., Honan, C., Reed, M., and Uraida, L. 1991. Effects of 
token va"riability on r~solution for vowel sounds. /011"'''' of llle Acollstical 
Society of America, 9O:2254(A). 
Vagges, K., Fenero, F., Magno-Caldognetto E., and Lavagnoli C. 1978. Some 
acoustic characteristics of Italian consonants. JOIl"'''' of It"/;",, Linguistics 
3,69-85. 
Waldman , F., Singh, S., and Hayden, M. 1978. A comparison of speech-sound 
producti on and discrimination in children with functional articulation dis­
orders. lnngllage and Speech 21:205--20. 
Wang, C. 1988. The production and perception of English vowels by native 
sp'eakers of Mandarin . Unpublished MA thesis, University of Alabama at 
Binningham . 
Weiher, E. 1975. Lautwahmehmung und Lautproduktion im Englischunterricht 
fUr Deutsche . Working Papers, 3, Institute of Phc.netics, University of Kie), 
Weinberger, S. 1987. The influence of linguistic 'context of syllable structure 
. simplification . In lnter/allguage Phonology, ed. C. loup, and S. Weinberber. 
Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Weinberger , S. 1990. Minimal segments in second language phonology . In New 
Sol/nds 90, Proceedings of the ]990 Amsterdam Symposium OIl the Acquisition of 
Second-ungl/flBe Speech, ed. J. Lealher, and A. James. Amsterdam : University 
of Amsterdam . 
Weiner, P. 1967. Auditory discrimination and articulation . jOlml,,1 of Speech & 
HMrillg Disorders 32:19-38. 
Weinreich , U. 1953. l.Jlngliage s in Contact, Findings and Problems. The Hague: 
Mouton. 
Weinreich, U. 1957. On the description of phonic interference . Word 13:1-11. 
Wenk, B. 1979, Articulatory setting and de-fossilization. Interlanglmge Studies 
Bullet;I.4 :202-20. . 
Werker, ]., and Logan, J. 1985. Cross-language evidence for three factors in 
speech perception . Perception & Psychophysics 37:35-44. 
Werker, J., and Tees, O. 1983. Developmental changes across childhood in the 
percepti on of non-native speech sounds. Canadian Journal of Psycllology 
37,271Hl6 . 
Werker, L and Tees, D. 1984. Phonemic and phonetic factors in adult cross­
language speech Berception . /014rn,,1 of the Acoustic,,/ Society of Americ" 
75,1866-78. 
Wieden, W. 1990. Some remarks on developing phonological representations . 
In New Sounds 90, Proceedings of lhe 1990 Amsterdam Symposium 0" the 

--- Page 46 ---
Second ~l.an8uage Speech l.earn;n8 I 277 
Acquisition of Stco"d·language Speech, ed. ]. leather, and A. James. 
Amsterdam: University of Amsterdam. 
Williams, L. 1979. The modjfication of speech perception and production in 
second-language learning. Perctp/ioll & Psychopllysics 26:95-104. 
Wade, H. 1978. The beginning of non-school room l2 phonological acquisition. 
Illtullali01IQ/ Revitw of Applial Linguistics 16:109-25. 
Yamada, R., and Tohkura, Y. 1992a. The effects of experimental variables on 
the perception of American English Irl and II/ by Japanese listeners . 
Perception & PSycilOphysics 52:376-92 . 
Yamada, R., and Tohkura, Y. 1992b. Perception of American English /rl and 
/1/ by native speakers of Japanese . In Spttch Perception , Produclion, and 
Linguistic Structure, ed. E. Tohkura, E. Vatikiotis-Baleson, and Y. Sagisaka. 
Tokyo: Ohmsha. 
Ycni-Komshian, G., and Flege, J. E. 1993. The effect of age of L2 acquisition on 
accuracy of pronunciation of phonetic segments. Paper presented at the 6th 
International Congress for the Study of Child Language. Trieste, Italy, July 
18-24,1993 . 
View publication stats